Permission is granted for enforcing this textbook from the academic year 2018-19 in the
meeting, held on the date 29.12.2017, of the coordination committee constituted by the
Government resolution No: Abhyas-2116/(Pra.kra.43/16) S.D-4 dated 25.4.2016

Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and
Curriculum Research, Pune.
The digital textbook can be obtained through DIKSHA App on
your smartphone by using the Q.R.Code given on title page of
the textbook and useful audio-visual teaching-learning material
of the relevant lesson will be available through the Q.R. Code
given in each lesson of this textbook.

A

First Edition : 2018
Reprint : 2022

© Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production
and Curriculum Research, Pune - 411 004.

The Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research reserves all
rights relating to the book. No part of this book should be reproduced without the written
permission of the Director, Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum
Research, ‘Balbharati’, Senapati Bapat Marg, Pune 411004.

Cover and Illustrations :
Shri. Vivekanand Shivshankar Patil
Ashana Advani
Typesetting :

Science Subject Committee :
Dr. Chandrashekhar Murumkar, Chairman
Dr. Dilip Sadashiv Joag, Member
Dr. Sushama Dilip Joag, Member
Dr. Pushpa Khare, Member
Dr. Imtiaz Sirajuddin Mulla, Member
Dr. Jaydeep Vinayak Sali, Member
Dr. Abhay Jere, Member
Dr. Sulabha Nitin Vidhate, Member
Smt. Mrinalini Desai, Member
Shri. Gajanan Suryawanshi, Member
Shri. Sudhir Yadavrao Kamble, Member
Smt. Dipali Dhananjay Bhale, Member
Shri. Rajiv Arun Patole, Member-Secretary

DTP Section, Textbook Bureau, Pune

Coordination :
Rajiv Arun Patole
Special Officer for Science
Translation :
Dr. Sushma Dilip Joag
Dr. Pushpa Khare
Dr. Dilip Sadashiv Joag
Scrutiny :
Dr. Imtiaz S. Mulla
Dr. Jaydeep Vinayak Sali

Science Study Group :
Dr. Prabhakar Nagnath Kshirsagar
Dr. Vishnu Vaze
Dr. Prachi Rahul Choudhary
Dr. Shaikh Mohammed Waquioddin H.
Dr. Ajay Digambar Mahajan
Dr. Gayatri Gorakhnath Choukade
Shri. Prashant Panditrao Kolse
Shri.Sandip Popatlal Chordiya
Shri. Sachin Ashok Bartakke
Smt. Shweta Dilip Thakur
Shri. Rupesh Dinkar Thakur
Shri. Dayashankar Vishnu Vaidya
Shri. Sukumar Shrenik Navale
Shri. Gajanan Nagoraoji Mankar
Shri. Mohammed Atique Abdul Shaikh
Smt. Anjali Lakshmikant Khadke
Smt. Manisha Rajendra Dahivelkar
Smt. Jyoti Medpilwar
Smt. Dipti Chandansingh Bisht
Smt. Pushpalata Gawande
Smt. Anita Patil
Smt. Kanchan Rajendra Sorate
Shri. Rajesh Vamanrao Roman
Shri. Nagesh Bhimsevak Telgote
Shri. Shankar Bhikan Rajput
Shri. Manoj Rahangdale
Shri. Hemant Achyut Lagvankar
Smt. Jyoti Damodar Karane
Shri. Vishwas Bhave

Paper :
70 GSM Creamwove
Print Order :
Printer :

Production :
Sachchitanand Aphale
Chief Production Officer
Rajendra Vispute
Production Officer

Publisher :
Vivek Uttam Gosavi
Controller
Maharashtra State Textbook Bureau,
Prabhadevi, Mumbai - 400 025.

B

C

D

Preface
Dear students
Welcome to Std X. We have great pleasure in offering you this Science and Technology
textbook based on the new syllabus. From the primary level till today, you have studied science
from various textbooks. In this textbook, you will be able to study the fundamental concepts
of science and technology from a different point of view through the medium of the different
branches of Science.
The basic purpose of this textbook Science and Technology Part-1 can be said to be
'Understand and explain to others' the science and technology that relates to our everyday
life. While studying the concepts, principles and theories in science, do make the effort to
understand their connection with day to day affairs. While studying from this textbook, use the
sections 'Can you recall?' and 'Can you tell?' for revision. You will learn science through the
many activities given under the titles such as 'Observe and discuss' and 'Try this' or 'Let's try
this. Make sure that you perform all these activities. Activities like 'Use your brain power!',
'Research', 'Think about it' will stimulate your power of thinking.
Many experiments have been included in the textbook. Carry out these experiments
yourself, following the given procedure and making your own observations. Ask your teachers,
parents or classmates for help whenever you need it. Interesting information which reveals the
science underlying the events we commonly observe, and the technology developed on its basis,
has been given in details in this textbook through several activities. In this world of rapidly
developing technology, you have already become familiar with computers and smartphones.
While studying the textbook, make full and proper use of the devices of information
communication technology, which will make your studies easier. For more effective studies,
you can avail additional audio-visual material for each chapter using the Q.R code through an
App.This will definitely help you in your studies.
While carrying out the given activities and experiments, take all precautions with regard
to handling apparatus, chemicals, etc. and encourage others to take the same precautions.
It is expected that while carrying out activities or observation involving plants and
animals, you will also make efforts towards conservation of the environment. You must of
course take all the care to avoid causing any harm or injury to them.
Do tell us about the parts that you like, as well as about the difficulties that you face as
you read and study and understand this textbook.
Our best wishes for your academic progress. 						

(Dr.Sunil Magar)
Director
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook
and Curriculum Research, Pune

Pune
Date : 18 March 2018, Gudhipadva			
Indian Solar Year : 27 Phalgun 1939

E

For Teachers
l In Standards I to V we have told the simple science in day to day life through the study
of surroundings. In VI to VIII standard we have given brief introduction to science. In the
textbook 'Science and Technology' for standard IX we have given the relation between
science and technology.
l The real objective of science education is to learn to be able to think logically and with
discretion about events that are happening around us.
l In view of the age group of Std X students, it would be appropriate, in the process of science
education, to give freedom and scope to the students’ own curiosity about the events of the
world, their propensity to go looking for the causes behind them and to their own initiative
and capacity to take the lead.
l As experimental skills are necessary for observation, logic, estimation, comparison and
application of information obtained in science education, deliberate efforts must be made
to develop these skills while dealing with laboratory experiments given in the textbook.
All observations that the students have noted should be accepted, and then they should be
helped to achieve the expected results.
l These two years in middle school lay the foundation of higher education in Science. Hence,
it is our responsibility to enrich and enhance student's interest in science. You all will of
course always actively pursue the objective of imbuing them with a scientific temper in
them and developing their creativity and along with internet and skill.
l You can use ‘Let’s recall’ to review the previous knowledge required for a lesson and ‘Can
you tell?’ to introduce a topic by eliciting all the knowledge that the students already have
about it from their own reading or experience. You may of course use any of your own
activities or questions that occur to you for this purpose. Activities given under ‘Try this’
and ‘Let’s try this’ help to explain the content of the lesson. The former are for students
to do themselves and the latter are those that you are expected to demonstrate. ‘Use your
brain power!’ is meant for application of previous knowledge for the new lesson, and
‘Always remember’ gives important suggestions/information or values. ‘Research’, ‘Find
out’, ‘Do you know?’, ‘Introduction to scientists’ and ‘Institutes at work’ are meant to give
some information about the world outside the textbook and to develop the habit of doing
independent reference work to obtain additional information.
l This textbook is not only meant for reading and explaining in the classroom but is also
for guiding students to learn the methods of gaining knowledge by carrying out the given
activities. An informal atmosphere in the classroom is required to achieve the aims of this
textbook. maximum number of students should be encouraged to participate in discussions,
experiments and activities. Special efforts should be made to organise presentations or
report-reading in the class based on students’ activities and projects, besides observing of
Science Day and other relevant occasions/ days.
l The science and technology content of the textbook has been complemented with Information
Communication Technology. These activities are to be conducted under your guidance

while learning various new scientific concepts.
Front and back covers : Pictures of various activities, experiments and concepts in the book.
DISCLAIMER Note : All attempts have been made to contact copy righters (©) but we have not heard from them.
We will be pleased to acknowledge the copy right holder (s) in our next edition if we learn from them.

F

Competency Statements
The students are expected to achieve the following competency level after studying the text book
Science and Technology Part 1

Motion, Force and Machines
* To be able to explain the scientific reasons behind various phenomenal on the basis of
relationship between gravitational force and motion.
* To be able to write formulae describing the relations between gravitation and motion and
using these solve various numerical problems.
Energy
* To adapt an environment friendly lifestyle taking into account the grave effects of energy
crisis and to encourage others to adapt it.
* To prepare , use and repair the equipments based on energy.
* To verify the laws of current electricity and to draw conclusions based on them
* To develop to solve numerical problems based on effects of current electricity.
* To observe various apparatus based on effects of current electricity and explain their
functions with reasons.
* To give a scientific explanation of the images formed by lenses by drawing accurate ray
diagrams.
* To explain properties of light, the images formed by lenses and their use in different
equipments used in day to day life.
* To find out the focal length of a lens using given data.
* To study defects of vision in human eye and their remedies
* To draw neat and labelled diagram of human eye.
Substances in our use
* To explain systematic classifications of elements and their positions in the periodic table.
* To identify type of chemical reaction in two components.
* To verify chemical reaction experimentally and draw conclusions.
* To correct the chemicals equation which is incomplete or wrong.
* To verify the properties of carbon compounds through experiments.
* To take proper care while performing the experiments and handling of the apparatus
considering the effects of chemical reactions on human health.
* To guide the society through scientific attitude about the use of carbon compounds in daily
life.
* To understand the relationship between chemical reaction of metals in daily life and use
them to solve various problem.
The Universe
* To analyse the information obtained from space research and remove superstitions
prevailing in society.
* To review the contribution made by India to space research.
* To search for future opportunities in the field of space research.
Information Communication technology (ICT)
* To use information communication Technology in day today life.
* To share the information about science and technology by using the internet.
* To explain amazing that have occurred fields by using information communication
technology

G

Index
Sr No. Title of Lesson						

Page No.

1.

Gravitation..........................................................................................................1

2.

Periodic Classification of Element..................................................................16

3.

Chemical reactions and equations..................................................................30

4.

Effects of electric current................................................................................47

5.

Heat...................................................................................................................62

6.

Refraction of light............................................................................................73

7.

Lenses................................................................................................................80

8.

Metallurgy........................................................................................................93

9.

Carbon compounds........................................................................................110

10. Space Missions................................................................................................135

Academic Planning
Two separate books have been prepared for Science and technology. Science
and technology part 1 contains ten chapters mainly related to physics and chemistry.
While thinking about science and technology, it is expected that an integrated
approach will be taken while teaching and a connection will be made between
different components of science and technology. In previous standards, we have
studied various topics in science and technology together. For technical case two
separate books science and technology part 1 and part 2 have been prepared, but it
is necessary that an integrated perspective be taken while teaching.
Out of the ten chapters included in text book science and technology part 1, the
first five chapters are expected to be taught in the first session while the next five
chapters in the second session. At the end of a session a written examination for 40
marks and a practical examination for ten marks should be conducted. Exercises
and projects have been given at the end of every chapters in the text book.
In view of evaluation, representative questions similar to those in the activity
sheets of language books are given in exercises. You may make similar other
questions for your use. The students should be evaluated based on these questions
detailed information above to this will be given in separate evaluation scheme.

H

1. Gravitation
Ø Gravitation		 Ø Circular motion and centripetal force
Ø Kepler’s laws
Ø Newton’s universal law of gravitation
Ø Acceleration due to the gravitational force of the Earth

Ø Free fall

Ø Escape velocity

1. What are the effects of a force acting on an object?
2. What types of forces are you familiar with?
3. What do you know about the gravitational force?
We have seen in the previous standard that the gravitational force is a universal force
and it acts not only between two objects on the earth but also between any two objects in
the universe. Let us now learn how this force was discovered.
Gravitation
As we have learnt, the phenomenon of gravitation was discovered by Sir Isaac
Newton. As the story goes, he discovered the force by seeing an apple fall from a tree on
the ground. He wondered why all apples fall vertically downward and not at an angle to
the vertical. Why do they not fly off in a horizontal direction?
After much thought, he came to the conclusion that the earth must be attracting the
apple towards itself and this attractive force must be directed towards the center of the
earth. The direction from the apple on the tree to the center of the earth is the vertical
direction at the position of the apple and thus, the apple falls vertically downwards.
Figure 1.1 on the left shows an apple tree
on the earth. The force on an apple on the tree
Moon
Gravitational
is towards the center of the earth i.e. along the
force
perpendicular from the position of the apple
to the surface of the earth. The Figure also
Falling
shows the gravitational force between the
apple
earth and the moon. The distances in the
figure are not according to scale.
Newton thought that if the force of
Earth
gravitation acts on apples on the tree at
different heights from the surface of the earth,
can it also act on objects at even greater
heights, much farther away from the earth,
1.1 Concept of the gravitational force and
like for example, the moon? Can it act on
the gravitational force between the earth
even farther objects like the other planets and
and the moon.
the Sun?
Can you recall?

.

Use of ICT : Collect videos and ppts about the gravitational force of different planets.
Force and Motion
We have seen that a force is necessary to change the speed as well as the direction of
motion of an object.
Can you recall?

What are Newton’s laws of motion?

1

Introduction to scientist Great Scientists: Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727) was one of
the greatest scientists of recent times. He was born in England.
He gave his laws of motion, equations of motion and theory of
gravity in his book Principia. Before this book was written,
Kepler had given three laws describing planetary motions.
However, the reason why planets move in the way described by
Kepler’s laws was not known. Newton, with his theory of
gravity, mathematically derived Kepler’s laws.
In addition to this, Newton did ground breaking work in several areas including
light, heat, sound and mathematics. He invented a new branch of mathematics. This is
called calculus and has wide ranging applications in physics and mathematics. He was
the first scientist to construct a reflecting telescope.
Circular motion and Centripetal force
Try this
Tie a stone to one end of a string. Take the other end in your
hand and rotate the string so that the stone moves along a circle
as shown in figure 1.2 a. Are you applying any force on the
stone? In which direction is this force acting? How will you
stop this force from acting? What will be the effect on the stone?
As long as we are holding the string, we are pulling the
a.
stone towards us i.e. towards the centre of the circle and are
applying a force towards it. The force stops acting if we release
the string. In this case, the stone will fly off along a straight line
which is the tangent to the circle at the position of the stone
when the string is released, because that is the direction of its
velocity at that instant of time (Figure 1.2 b). You may recall
that we have performed a similar activity previously in which a
5 rupee coin kept on a rotating circular disk flies off the disk
b.
along the tangent to the disk. Thus, a force acts on any object
moving along a circle and it is directed towards the centre of the 1.2 A stone tied to a string,
circle. This is called the Centripetal force. ‘Centripetal’ means moving along a circular
centre seeking, i.e. the object tries to go towards the centre of the path and its velocity in
tangential direction
circle because of this force.
You know that the moon, which is the natural satellite of the earth, goes round it in a
definite orbit. The direction of motion of the moon as well as its speed constantly changes
during this motion. Do you think some force is constantly acting on the moon? What must
be the direction of this force? How would its motion have been if no such force acted on
it? Do the other planets in the solar system revolve around the Sun in a similar fashion? Is
similar force acting on them? What must be its direction?
From the above activity, example and questions it is clear that for the moon to go
around the earth, there must be a force which is exerted on the moon and this force must
be exerted by the earth which attracts the moon towards itself. Similarly, the Sun must be
attracting the planets, including the earth, towards itself.

2

Kepler’s Laws
Planetary motion had been observed by astronomers since ancient times. Before
Galileo, all observations of the planet’s positions were made with naked eyes. By the 16th
century a lot of data were available about planetary positions and motion. Johannes
Kepler, studied these data. He noticed that the motion of planets follows certain laws. He
stated three laws describing planetary motion. These are known as Kepler’s laws which
are given below.

Do you know ?
An ellipse is the curve obtained when
a cone is cut by an inclined plane. It has
two focal points. The sum of the distances
to the two focal points from every point
on the curve is constant. F1 and F2 are two
focal points of the ellipse shown in figure
1.3. If A, B and C are three points on the
ellipse then,

B

A

F1

F2

C

AF1 + AF2 = BF1 + BF2 = CF1 + CF2

1.3 An ellipse

Kepler’s first law :
D
C
The orbit of a planet is an ellipse
2
with the Sun at one of the foci.
Figure 1.4 shows the elliptical orbit of
B
a planet revolving around the sun. The E
position of the Sun is indicated by S.
3
1
Kepler’s second law :
F
S
The line joining the planet and the
Sun
A
Sun sweeps equal areas in equal intervals
of time.
Planet
AB and CD are distances covered by
the planet in equal time i.e. after equal in1.4 The orbit of a planet moving
tervals of time, the positions of the planet
around the Sun.
starting from A and C are shown by B and
D respectively.
The straight lines AS and CS sweep equal area in equal interval of time i.e. area ASB
and CSD are equal.
Kepler’s third law :
The square of its period of revolution around the Sun is directly proportional to
the cube of the mean distance of a planet from the Sun.
Thus, if r is the average distance of the planet from the Sun and T is its period of
revolution then,
T2
2
3
T a r i.e.
= constant = K ............. (1)
3

r

Kepler obtained these laws simply from the study of the positions of planets obtained
by regular observations. He had no explanation as to why planets obey these laws. We
will see below how these laws helped Newton in the formulation of his theory of gravitation.

3

If the area ESF in figure 1.4 is equal to area ASB, what
will you infer about EF?
Newton’s universal law of gravitation
All the above considerations including Kepler’s laws led Newton to formulate his
theory of Universal gravity. According to this theory, every object in the Universe attracts
every other object with a definite force. This force is directly proportional to the product
of the masses of the two objects and is inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them.
Use your brain power

An introduction to scientists
Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) was a German astronomer
and mathematician. He started working as a helper to the famous
astronomer Tycho Brahe in Prague in 1600. After the sudden
death of Brahe in 1601, Kepler was appointed as the Royal
mathematician in his place. Kepler used the observations of
planetary positions made by Brahe to discover the laws of
planetary motion. He wrote several books. His work was later
used by Newton in postulating his law of gravitation.
Figure 1.5 shows two objects with masses m1 and
m2 kept at a distance d from each other. Mathematically,
the gravitational force of attraction between these two
bodies can be written as
Fa

m1m2
d2

or

F= G

m1m2
d2

....... (2)

d
1.5 Gravitational force between
two objects

Here, G is the constant of proportionality and is called the Universal gravitational
constant.
The above law means that if the mass of one object is doubled, the force between the
two objects also doubles. Also, if the distance is doubled, the force decreases by a factor
of 4. If the two bodies are spherical, the direction of the force is always along the line
joining the centres of the two bodies and the distance between the centres is taken to be d.
In case when the bodies are not spherical or have irregular shape, then the direction of
force is along the line joining their centres of mass and d is taken to be the distance
between the two centres of mass.

Use your brain power

From equation (2), it can be seen that
the value of G is the gravitational force
acting between two unit masses kept at a
unit distance away from each other. Thus,
in SI units, the value of G is equal to the
gravitational force between two masses of
1 kg kept 1 m apart.

Show that in SI units, the unit of G
is Newton m2 kg-2. The value of G was
first experimentally measured by Henry
Cavendish. In SI units its value is
6.673 x 10-11 N m2 kg-2.

4

The centre of mass of an object is the point inside or outside the object at which the
total mass of the object can be assumed to be concentrated. The centre of mass of a
spherical object having uniform density is at its geometrical centre. The centre of mass
of any object having uniform density is at its centroid.
Why did Newton assume inverse square dependence on distance in his law of
gravitation? He was helped by Kepler’s third law in this as shown below.
Uniform circular motion / Magnitude of centripetal force
Consider an object moving in a circle with constant speed. We have seen earlier that
such a motion is possible only when the object is constantly acted upon by a force directed
towards the centre of the circle. This force is called the centripetal force. If m is the mass
of the object, v is its speed and r is the radius of the circle, then it can be shown that this
force is equal to F = m v2/r.
If a planet is revolving around the Sun in a circular
distance travelled
orbit in uniform circular motion, then the centripetal force Speed =
time taken
acting on the planet towards the Sun must be F = mv2/r,
where, m is the mass of the planet, v is its speed and r is its
distance from the Sun.
The speed of the planet can be expressed in terms of the period of revolution T as
follows.
The distance travelled by the planet in one revolution =perimeter of the orbit 2 p r ;
r = distance of the planet from the Sun, Time taken = Period of revolution = T
distance travelled 		 2pr
v=
=
time taken
T
2pr 2
m
mv2
4 m p2 r , multiplying and dividing by r2 we get,
T
=
F=
=
r
T2
r
r3
4 m p2
T2
F=
´
2
.
According
to
Kepler’s
third
law,
2
=K
r
T
r3
1
1
4 m p2
4 m p2
\
F
=
constant
´
\
F
α
2
F=
,
But
= Constant
r
r2
r2 K
K
Thus, Newton concluded that the centripetal force which is the force acting on the
planet and is responsible for its circular motion, must be inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between the planet and the Sun. Newton identified this force with
the force of gravity and hence postulated the inverse square law of gravitation. The
gravitational force is much weaker than other forces in nature but it controls the Universe
and decides its future. This is possible because of the huge masses of planets, stars and
other constituents of the Universe.

(

)

( (

Use your brain power
Is there a gravitational force between two objects kept on a table or between you
and your friend sitting next to you? If yes, why don’t the two move towards each other?

5

Solved examples
Example 1 : Mahendra and Virat are sitting
Given: Force on Mahendra = F = 4.002 x
at a distance of 1 metre from each other. Their
10 -7 N, Mahendra’s mass = m = 75 kg
masses are 75 kg and 80 kg respectively.
According to Newton’s second law, the
What is the gravitational force between them?
acceleration produced by the force on
Given : r = 1 m, m1 = 75 kg, m2 = 80 kg and
Mahendra = m = 75 kg.
G = 6.67 x 10 -11 Nm2/kg2
F
4.002 x 10-7
a
=
=
= 5.34 x 10-9 m/s2
According to Newton’s law
m
75
G m1m2
Using Newton’s first equation, we can 		
F=
r2
calculate Mahendra’s velocity after 1s,
6.67 x 10-11 x 75 x 80
Newton’s first equation of motion is
F =
N
12
v = u + a t;
= 4.002 x 10-7 N
As Mahendra is sitting on the bench, his
The gravitational force between Mahendra
initial velocity is zero (u=0)
and Virat is 4.002 x 10-7 N
Assuming the bench to be frictionless,
This is a very small force. If the force of
v = 0 + 5.34 x 10-9 x 1 m/s
friction between Mahendra and the bench on
= 5.34 x 10-9 m/s
which he is sitting is zero, then he will start
Mahendra’s velocity after 1 s will be
moving towards Virat under the action of
5.34 x 10-9 m/s .
this force. We can calculate his acceleration
This is an extremely small velocity.
and velocity by using Newton’s laws of moThe velocity will increase with time because
tion.
of the acceleration. The acceleration will
Example 2 : In the above example, assuming
also not remain constant because as
that the bench on which Mahendra is sitting
Mahendra moves towards Virat, the
is frictionless, starting with zero velocity,
distance between them will decrease,
what will be Mahendra’s velocity of motion
causing an increase in the gravitational
towards Virat after 1 s ? Will this velocity
force, thereby increasing the acceleration
change with time and how?
as per Newton’s second law of motion.
Use your brain power !

Assuming the acceleration in Example 2 above remains
constant, how long will Mahendra take to move 1 cm
towards Virat?

Do you know ?

Low tide

You must be knowing about the high and
low tides that occur regularly in the sea. The
level of sea water at any given location along
High
sea shore increases and decreases twice a day tide
at regular intervals. High and low tides occur at
different times at different places. The level of
water in the sea changes because of the
1.6 Low and high tides
gravitational force exerted by the moon. Water
directly under the moon gets pulled towards the moon and the level of water there goes up
causing high tide at that place. At two places on the earth at 90o from the place of high
tide, the level of water is minimum and low tides occur there as shown in figure 1.6

6

Collect information about high and low tides from geography books. Observe the
timing of high and low tides at one place when you go for a picnic to be a beach. Take
pictures and hold an exhibition.
Earth’ gravitational force
Will the velocity of a stone thrown vertically upwards remain constant or will it change
with time? How will it change? Why doesn’t the stone move up all the time? Why does it fall
down after reaching a certain height? What does its maximum height depend on ?
The earth attracts every object near it towards itself because of the gravitational force.
The centre of mass of the earth is situated at its centre, so the gravitational force on any object
due to the earth is always directed towards the centre of the earth. Because of this force, an
object falls vertically downwards on the earth.
Similarly, when we throw a stone vertically upwards, this force tries to pull it down and
reduces its velocity. Due to this constant downward pull, the velocity becomes zero after a
while. The pull continues to be exerted and the stone starts moving vertically downward
towards the centre of the earth under its influence.
Solved Examples
Example 1: Calculate the gravitational force
Example 2: Starting from rest, what will be
due to the earth on Mahendra in the earlier
Mahendra’s velocity after one second if he
example.
is falling down due to the gravitational force
24
Given: Mass of the earth = m1 = 6 x 10 kg
of the earth?
Radius of the earth = R = 6.4 x 106 m
Given: u = 0, F = 733 N,
Mahendra’s mass = m2 = 75 kg
Mahendra’s mass = m = 75 kg
G = 6.67 x 10-11 Nm2/kg2
time t = 1 s
Using the force law, the gravitational
Mahendra’s acceleration
force on Mahendra due to earth is given by
F
733
a=
=
m/s2
This force is 1.83 x 109 times larger than
m
75
the gravitational force between Mahendra
According to Newton’s first equation of
and Virat.
motion,
G m1m2
v=u+at
F=
R2
Mahendra’s velocity after 1 second
v = 0 + 9.77 x 1 m/s
6.67 x 10-11 x 75 x 6 x 1024
N = 733 N
v = 9.77 m/s
F =
(6.4 x 106 )2
This is 1.83 x 109 times Mahendra’s velocity
in example 2, on page 6.

According to Newton’s law of gravitation, every
object attracts every other object.
Thus, if the earth attracts an apple towards itself, the apple also attracts the earth towards itself with the same force. Why then does the apple fall towards the earth, but the
earth does not move towards the apple?
The gravitational force due to the earth also acts on the moon because of which it
revolves around the earth. Similar situation exists for the artificial satellites orbiting the
earth. The moon and the artificial satellites orbit the earth. The earth attracts them towards
itself but unlike the falling apple, they do not fall on the earth, why? This is because of the
velocity of the moon and the satellites along their orbits. If this velocity was not there, they
would have fallen on the earth.

Use your brain power !

7

Earth’s gravitational acceleration
The earth exerts gravitational force on objects near it. According to Newton’s second law
of motion, a force acting on a body results in its acceleration. Thus, the gravitational force due
to the earth on a body results in its acceleration. This is called acceleration due to gravity and
is denoted by ‘g’. Acceleration is a vector. As the gravitational force on any object due to the
earth is directed towards the centre of the earth, the direction of the acceleration due to gravity is also directed towards the centre of the earth i.e. vertically downwards.

Think about it

1. What would happen if there were no gravity?
2. What would happen if the value of G was twice as large?

Value of g on the surface of the earth
We can calculate the value of g by using Newton’s universal law of gravitation for an
object of mass m situated at a distance r from the centre of the earth. The law of gravitation
gives
GMm
F=
............. (3) M is the mass of the earth.
r2
GMm
F = m g ................... (4) From (3) and (4), mg =
r2
GM
g=
............ (5) If the object is situated on the surface of the earth, r = R = Radius
r2
of the earth. Thus, the value of g on the surface of the earth is.
G M ......... (6)
The unit of g in SI units is m/s2. The mass and radius of the earth
g=
2
R
are 6 x1024 kg and 6.4x106 m, respectively. Using these in (6)
6.67 x 10-11 x 6 x 1024
= 9.77 m/s2 ......................... (7)
g=
(6.4 x 106 )2
This acceleration depends only on the mass M and radius R of the earth and so the
acceleration due to gravity at a given point on the earth is the same for all objects. It does not
depend on the properties of the object.

Can you tell?

What would be the value of g on the surface of the earth if its
mass was twice as large and its radius half of what it is now?

Variation in value of g
A. Change along the surface of the earth : Will the value of g be the same everywhere on
the surface of the earth? The answer is no. The reason is that the shape of the earth is not exactly spherical and so the distance of a point on the surface of the earth from its centre differs
somewhat from place to place. Due to its rotation, the earth bulges at the equator and is flatter
at the poles. Its radius is largest at the equator and smallest at the poles. The value of g is thus
highest (9.832 m/s2) at the poles and decreases slowly with decreasing latitude. It is lowest
(9.78 m/s2) at the equator.
B. Change with height : As we go above the earth’s surface, the value of r in equation (5)
increases and the value of g decreases. However, the decrease is rather small for heights
which are small in comparison to the earth’s radius. For example, remember that the radius
of the earth is 6400 km. If an aeroplane is flying at a height 10 km above the surface of the
earth, its distance from the earth’s surface changes from 6400 km to 6410 km and the change
in the value of g due to it is negligible. On the other hand, when we consider an artificial
satellite orbiting the earth, we have to take into account the change in the value of g due to the
large change in the distance of the satellite from the centre of the earth. Some typical heights
and the values of g at these heights are given in the following table.

8

Place

Height (km)

g (m/s2)

Surface of the earth (average)
Mount Everest
Maximum height reached by manmade balloon
Height of a typical weather satellite
Height of communication satellite

0
8.8
36.6

9.8
9.8
9.77

400
35700

8.7
0.225

1.7 Table showing change of g with height above the earth’s surface

C. Change with depth : The value of g also changes if we go inside the earth. The value
of r in equation (5) decreases and one would think that the value of g should increase as
per the formula. However, the part of the earth which contributes towards the gravitational force felt by the object also decreases. Which means that the value of M to be used in
equation (5) also decreases. As a combined result of change in r and M, the value of g
decreases as we go deep inside the earth.
1. Will the direction of the gravitational force change as we go
inside the earth?
2. What will be the value of g at the centre of the earth?
Every planet and satellite has different mass and radius. Hence, according to equation
(6), the values of g on their surfaces are different. On the moon it is about 1/6th of the value
on the earth. As a result, using the same amount of force, we can jump 6 times higher on
the moon as compared to that on the earth.
Mass and Weight
Mass : Mass is the amount of matter present in the object. The SI unit of mass is kg. Mass
is a scalar quantity. Its value is same everywhere. Its value does not change even when we
go to another planet. According to Newton’s first law, it is the measure of the inertia of an
object. Higher the mass, higher is the inertia.
Weight : The weight of an object is defined as the force with which the earth attracts the
object. The force (F) on an object of mass m on the surface of the earth can be written
using equation (4)
GM
\Weight, W = F = m g .... ( g = R2 )
Weight being a force, its SI unit is Newton. Also, the weight, being a force, is a vector
quantity and its direction is towards the centre of the earth. As the value of g is not same
everywhere, the weight of an object changes from place to place, though its mass is
constant everywhere.
Think about it

Colloquially we use weight for both mass and weight and measure the weight in
kilograms which is the unit of mass. But in scientific language when we say that Rajeev’s
weight is 75 kg, we are talking about Rajeev’s mass. What we mean is that Rajeev’s
weight is equal to the gravitational force on 75 kg mass. As Rajeev’s mass is 75 kg, his
weight on earth is F = mg = 75 x 9.8 = 735 N. The weight of 1 kg mass is 1 x 9.8 = 9.8
N. Our weighing machines tell us the mass. The two scale balances in shops compare
two weights i.e. two masses.

9

1. Will your weight remain constant as you go above
the surface of the earth?
2. Suppose you are standing on a tall ladder. If your distance from the centre of the earth
is 2R, what will be your weight?
Solved Examples
Example 1: If a person weighs 750 N on earth, how much would be his weight on the
Moon given that moon’s mass is 1 of that of the earth and its radius is 1 of that of
3.7
81
the earth ?
Given: Weight on earth = 750 N,
M
Ratio of mass of the earth (ME) to mass of the moon (MM) = E = 81
MM
R
Ratio of radius of earth (RE) to radius of moon (RM) = E = 3.7
RM
Let the mass of the person be m kg
750 RE2
m G ME
\m=
.................. (i)
Weight on the earth = m g = 750 =
(G ME)
RE2
m G MM
Weight on Moon =
using (i)
RM2
Use your brain power !

G MM
750 RE2
1
R2 M
x
= 750 E 2 x M = 750 x (3.7)2 x
= 126.8 N
=
2
RM
ME
(G ME)
81
RM
The weight on the moon is nearly 1/6th of the weight on the earth. We can write the
weight on moon as mgm (gm is the acceleration due to gravity on the moon). Thus gm is 1/6th
of the g on the earth.
Do you know ?
Gravitational waves
Waves are created on the surface of water when we drop a stone into it. Similarly
you must have seen the waves generated on a string when both its ends are held in hand
and it is shaken. Light is also a type of wave called the electromagnetic wave. Gamma
rays, X-rays, ultraviolet rays, infrared rays, microwave and radio waves are all different
types of electromagnetic waves. Astronomical objects emit these waves and we receive
them using our instruments. All our knowledge about the universe has been obtained
through these waves.
Gravitational waves are a very different type of waves. They have been called the
waves on the fabric of space-time. Einstein predicted their existence in 1916. These
waves are very weak and it is very difficult to detect them. Scientists have constructed
extremely sensitive instruments to detect the gravitational waves emitted by astronomical
sources. Among these, LIGO (Laser Interferometric Gravitational Wave Observatory)
is the prominent one. Exactly after hundred years of their prediction, scientists detected
these waves coming from an astronomical source. Indian scientists have contributed
significantly in this discovery. This discovery has opened a new path to obtain
information about the Universe.

10

Free fall
Try this

Take a small stone. Hold it in your hand. Which forces are acting
on the stone? Now release the stone. What do you observe? What are
the forces acting on the stone after you release it?

We know that the force of gravity due to the earth acts on each and every object.
When we were holding the stone in our hand, the stone was experiencing this force, but it
was balanced by a force that we were applying on it in the opposite direction. As a result,
the stone remained at rest. Once we release the stone from our hands, the only force that
acts on it is the gravitational force of the earth and the stone falls down under its influence.
Whenever an object moves under the influence of the force of gravity alone, it is said to be
falling freely. Thus the released stone is in a free fall. In free fall, the initial velocity of the
object is zero and goes on increasing due to the acceleration due to gravity of the earth.
During free fall, the frictional force due to air opposes the motion of the object and a buoyant force also acts on the object. Thus, true free fall is possible only in vacuum.
For a freely falling object, the velocity on reaching the earth and the time taken for it
can be calculated by using Newton’s equations of motion. For free fall, the initial velocity
u = 0 and the acceleration a = g. Thus we can write the equations as
v=gt
s=

1 g t2
2

v2 = 2 g s

For calculating the motion of an object thrown upwards, acceleration is negative, i.e. in a direction opposite to the velocity and is taken to
be – g. The magnitude of g is the same but the velocity of the object
decreases because of this -ve acceleration.
The moon and the artificial satellites are moving only under the influence of the gravitational field of the earth. Thus they are in free fall.

Do you know ?
The value of g is the same for all objects at a given place on the earth. Thus, any
two objects, irrespective of their masses or any other properties, when dropped from the
same height and falling freely will reach the earth at the same time. Galileo is said to
have performed an experiment around 1590 in the Italian city of Pisa. He dropped two
spheres of different masses from the leaning tower of Pisa to demonstrate that both
spheres reached the ground at the same time.
When we drop a feather and a heavy stone at the same time from a height, they do
not reach the earth at the same time. The feather experiences a buoyant force and a
frictional force due to air and therefore floats and reaches the ground slowly, later than
the heavy stone. The buoyant and frictional forces on the stone are much less than the
weight of the stone and does not affect the speed of the stone much. Recently, scientists
performed this experiment in vacuum and showed that the feather and stone indeed
reach the earth at the same time.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eRNC5kcvINA

11

Solved Examples
Example 1. An iron ball of mass 3 kg is
Example 2. A tennis ball is thrown up and
reaches a height of 4.05 m before coming
released from a height of 125 m and falls
down. What was its initial velocity? How
freely to the ground. Assuming that the
2
much total time will it take to come down?
value of g is 10 m/s , calculate
Assume g = 10 m/s2
(i) time taken by the ball to reach the
Given: For the upward motion of the ball,
ground
the final velocity of the ball = v = 0
(ii) velocity of the ball on reaching the
Distance travelled by the ball = 4.05 m
ground
acceleration a= - g = -10 m/s2
(iii) the height of the ball at half the time it
Using Newton’s third equation of motion
takes to reach the ground.
v2 = u2 + 2 a s
Given: m = 3 kg, distance travelled by the
0 = u2 + 2 (-10) x 4.05
ball s = 125 m, initial velocity of the ball =
\ u2 = 81
u = o and acceleration a = g = 10 m/s2.
u = 9 m/s The initial velocity of the ball
(i) Newton’s second equation of motion
is 9 m/s
gives
1
2
Now let us consider the downward
s=ut +
at
2
motion of the ball. Suppose the ball takes t
1
2
2
seconds to come down. Now the initial
\ 125 = 0 t +
x 10 x t = 5 t
2
velocity of the ball is zero, u = 0. Distance
125
t2 =
= 25
travelled by the ball on reaching the ground
,t=5s
5
= 4.05 m. As the velocity and acceleration
The ball takes 5 seconds to reach the
are in the same direction,
ground.
a = g=10 m/s
(ii) According to Newton’s first equation
According to Newton’s second equation of
of motion final velocity = v = u + a t
motion
= 0 + 10 x 5
1
= 50 m/s
s=ut +
a t2
2
The velocity of the ball on reaching the
1
ground is 50 m/s
4.05 = 0 + 2 10 t2
5
(iii) Half time = t =
= 2.5 s
2
4.05
t2 =
= 0.81 , t = 0.9 s
Ball’s height at this time = s
5
According to Newton’s second equation
The ball will take 0.9 s to reach the
1
s=ut +
a t2
ground. It will take the same time to go up.
2
1
Thus, the total time taken = 2 x 0.9 = 1.8 s
s= 0+
10 x (2.5)2 = 31.25 m.
2
Thus the height of the ball at half time
= 125-31.25 = 93.75 m

Use your brain power !

According to Newton’s law of gravitation, earth’s
gravitational force is higher on an object of larger mass.
Why doesn’t that object fall down with higher velocity
as compared to an object with lower mass?

12

8

Gravitational potential energy
We have studied potential energy in last standard. The energy stored in an object because
of its position or state is called potential energy. This energy is relative and increases as we
go to greater heights from the surface of the earth. We had assumed that the potential energy
of an object of mass m, at a height h from the ground is mgh and on the ground it is zero.
When h is small compared to the radius R of the earth, we can assume g to be constant and
can use the above formula (mgh). But for large values of h, the value of g decreases with
increase in h. For an object at infinite distance from the earth, the value of g is zero and
earth’s gravitational force does not act on the object. So it is more appropriate to assume the
value of potential energy to be zero there. Thus, for smaller distances, i.e. heights, the potential
energy is less than zero, i.e. it is negative.
GMm
When an object is at a height h from the surface of the earth, its potential energy is - R+h
here, M and R are earth’s mass and radius respectively.
Escape velocity
We have seen than when a ball is thrown upwards, its velocity decreases because of the
gravitation of the earth. The velocity becomes zero after reaching a certain height and after
that the ball starts falling down. Its maximum height depends on its initial velocity. According
to Newton’s third equation of motion is
v2 = u2+2as,
v = the final velocity of the ball = 0 and a = - g
u2
\ 0 = u2 + 2 (-g) s and maximum height of the ball = s = - 2g
Thus, higher the initial velocity u, the larger is the height reached by the ball.
The reason for this is that the higher the initial velocity, the ball will oppose the gravity of
the earth more and larger will be the height to which it can reach.
We have seen above that the value of g keeps decreasing as we go higher above the surface
of the earth. Thus, the force pulling the ball downward, decreases as the ball goes up. If we
keep increasing the initial velocity of the ball, it will reach larger and larger heights and
above a particular value of initial velocity of the ball, the ball is able to overcome the
downward pull by the earth and can escape the earth forever and will not fall back on the
earth. This velocity is called escape velocity. We can determine its value by using the law of
conservation of energy as follows.
An object going vertically upwards from the surface of the earth, having an initial velocity equal to the escape velocity, escapes the gravitational force of the earth. The force of
gravity, being inversely proportional to the square of the distance, becomes zero only at infinite distance from the earth. This means that for the object to be free from the gravity of the
earth, it has to reach infinite distance from the earth. i.e. the object will come to rest at infinite distance and will stay there.
For an object of mass m
on the surface of earth
at infinite distance from the earth
1
A. Kinetic energy = 0
A. Kinetic energy =
mv2esc
2 GMm
GMm = 0
B. Potential energy = =B.
Potential
energy
R
C. Total energy = E1 = Kinetic energy
+ Potential energy C. Total energy = E2 = Kinetic energy + 		
potential energy
1
GMm
=
mv2esc 				
=
0
2
R

13

From the principle of conservation of energy
Solved Examples
E1 = E2
Example 1. Calculate the escape velocity on
1
GMm
the surface of the moon given the mass and
= 0
mv2esc 2
R
radius of the moon to be 7.34 x 1022 kg and
2 GM
2
1.74 x 106 m respectively.
v esc =
R
Given: G = 6.67 x 10-11 N m2/kg2, mass of the
2
GM
vesc =
moon = M = 7.34 x 1022 kg and radius of the
R
moon = R= 1.74 x 106 m.
= 2gR
2 GM
Escape velocity = vesc =
R
= (2 x 9.8 x 6.4 x 106) = 11.2 km/s
2 x 6.67 x 10-11 x 7.34 x 1022
The spacecrafts which are sent to
1.74 x 106
the moon or other planets have to have
their initial velocity larger than the escape
= 2.37 km/s
velocity so that they can overcome earth’s
Escape velocity on the moon 2.37 km/s.
gravitational attraction and can travel to
these objects.
Do you know ?
Weightlessness in space
Space travellers as well as objects in the spacecraft appear to be floating. Why does this
happen? Though the spacecraft is at a height from the surface of the earth, the value of g
there is not zero. In the space station the value of g is only 11% less than its value on the
surface of the earth. Thus, the height of a spacecraft is not the reason for their weightlessness.
Their weightlessness is caused by their being in the state of free fall. Though the spacecraft
is not falling on the earth because of its velocity along the orbit, the only force acting on it is
the gravitational force of the earth and therefore it is in a free fall. As the velocity of free fall
does not depend on the properties of an object, the velocity of free fall is the same for the
spacecraft, the travelers and the objects in the craft. Thus, if a traveller releases an object
from her hand, it will remain stationary with respect to her and will appear to be weightless.

Exercise
1. Study the entries in the following
table and rewrite them putting the
connected items in a single row.
I
II
III
2
Mass
m/s
Zero at the
centre
Weight
kg
Measure of inertia
2
2
A c c e l e r a - Nm /kg Same in the entire
tion due to
universe
gravity
Gravita- N
Depends on height
tional constant

2. Answer the following questions.
a. What is the difference between mass and
weight of an object. Will the mass and
weight of an object on the earth be same
as their values on Mars? Why?
b What are (i) free fall, (ii) acceleration
due to gravity (iii) escape velocity (iv)
centripetal force ?
c. Write the three laws given by Kepler.
How did they help Newton to arrive at the
inverse square law of gravity?

14

d. A stone thrown vertically upwards with
initial velocity u reaches a height ‘h’
before coming down. Show that the
time taken to go up is same as the time
taken to come down.
e. If the value of g suddenly becomes twice
its value, it will become two times more
difficult to pull a heavy object along the
floor. Why?

d. An object thrown vertically upwards
reaches a height of 500 m. What was
its initial velocity? How long will the
object take to come back to the
earth? Assume g = 10 m/s2
Ans: 100 m/s and 20 s

e. A ball falls off a table and reaches
the ground in 1 s. Assuming g = 10
m/s2, calculate its speed on reaching
the ground and the height of the
table.
				
Ans. 10 m/s and 5 m
f. The masses of the earth and moon
are 6 x 1024 kg and 7.4x1022 kg,
respectively. The distance between
them is 3.84 x 105 km. Calculate the
gravitational force of attraction
between the two?
		
Use G = 6.7 x 10-11 N m2 kg-2
			
Ans: 2 x 1020 N

3. Explain why the value of g is zero at
the centre of the earth.
4. Let the period of revolution of a planet
at a distance R from a star be T. Prove
that if it was at a distance of 2R from
the star, its period of revolution will be
8 T.
5. Solve the following examples.
a. An object takes 5 s to reach the
ground from a height of 5 m on a
planet. What is the value of g on the
planet?
				 Ans: 0.4 m/s2
b. The radius of planet A is half the
radius of planet B. If the mass of A is
MA, what must be the mass of B so
that the value of g on B is half that of
its value on A?
				
Ans: 2 MA
c. The mass and weight of an object on
earth are 5 kg and 49 N respectively.
What will be their values on the
moon? Assume that the acceleration
due to gravity on the moon is 1/6th
of that on the earth.
		
Ans: 5 kg and 8.17 N

g. The mass of the earth is 6 x 1024 kg.
The distance between the earth and
the Sun is 1.5x 1011 m. If the
gravitational force between the two
is 3.5 x 1022 N, what is the mass of
the Sun?
Use G = 6.7 x 10-11 N m2 kg-2
		
Ans: 1.96 x 1030 kg
Project:
Take weights of five of your friends.
Find out what their weights will be on the
moon and the Mars.

²²²

15

2.Periodic Classification of Elements
Ø Elements and their classification
Ø Newlands Law of Octaves
Ø Modern Periodic Table

Ø Dobereiner’s Triads
Ø Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

1. What are the types of matter?		
2. What are the types of elements?
Can you recall?
3. What are the smallest particles of matter called?
4. What is the difference between the molecules of elements and
compounds?
Classification of elements
We have learnt in the previous standards that all the atoms of an element are of only
one type. Today 118 elements are known to the scientific world. However, around year
1800 only about 30 elements were known. More number of elements were discovered in
the course of time. More and more information about the properties of these elements was
gathered. To ease the study of such a large number of elements, scientists started studying
the pattern if any, in the vast information about them. You know that in the initial
classification elements were classified into the groups of metals and nonmetals. Later on
another class of elements called metalloids was noticed. As the knowledge about elements
and their properties went on increasing different scientists started trying out different
methods of classification.
Dobereiner’s Triads
In the year 1817 a German scientist Dobereiner suggested that properties of elements
are related to their atomic masses. He made groups of three elements each, having similar
chemical properties and called them triads. He arranged the three elements in a triad in an
increasing order of atomic mass and showed that the atomic mass of the middle element
was approximately equal to the mean of the atomic masses of the other two elements.
However, all the known elements could not be classified into the Dobereiner’s triads.
Sr.
No.

Triad

1

Li, Na,
K
Ca, Sr,
Ba
Cl, Br, I

2
3

Element -1
Actual atomic
mass(a)

Element - 2
Element - 3
Actual atomic
a+c
Actual
Mean =
mass (c)
2
atomic mass
Lithium (Li) Sodium 6.9 + 39.1 = 23.0
(Na)
Potassium (K)
2
6.9
23.0
39.1
Calcium (Ca) Strontium 40.1+ 137.3
(Sr)
Barium (Ba)
= 88.7
2
40.1
87.6
137.3
Chlorine (Cl) Bromine 35.5 + 126.9 = 81.2
(Br)
Iodine (I)
35.5
79.9
126.9
2
2.1 Dobereiner’s Triads

Identify Dobereiner’s triads from the following groups of
elements having similar chemical properties.
1. Mg (24.3), Ca (40.1), Sr (87.6)
2. S (32.1), Se (79.0), Te (127.6)
3. Be (9.0), Mg (24.3), Ca (40.1)

Can you tell?

16

Newlands’ Law of Octaves
The English scientist John Newlands
correlated the atomic masses of elements
to their properties in a different way. In the
year 1866 Newlands arranged the elements
known at that time in an increasing order
of their atomic masses. It started with the
lightest element hydrogen and ended up
with thorium. He found that every eighth
element had properties similar to those of
the first. For example, sodium is the eighth
element from lithium and both have similar
properties. Also, magnesium shows
similarity to beryllium and chlorine shows
similarity with fluorine. Newlands
compared this similarity with the octaves
in music. He called the similarity observed
in the eighth and the first element as the
Law of octaves.
Musical
Do
Re
Mi
Note
(Sa)
(Re)
(Ga)

Elements

H
F
Cl
Co &Ni
Br

Li
Na
K
Cu
Rb

Do you know ?
In the Indian music system there
are seven main notes, namely, Sa, Re,
Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, and their collection
is called ‘Saptak’. The frequency of the
notes goes on increasing from ‘Sa’ to
‘Ni’. Then comes, the ‘Sa’ of the upper
‘Saptak’ at the double the frequency of
the original ‘Sa’. It means that notes
repeat after completion of one ‘Saptak’.
The seven notes in the western music
are Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti.
The note ‘Do’ having double the
original frequency comes again at the
eighth place. This is the octave of
western notes. Music is created by the
variety in the use of these notes.

Be
Mg
Ca
Zn
Sr

Fa
(Ma)

So
(Pa)

La
(Dha)

Ti
(Ni)

B
Al
Cr
Y
Ce & La

C
Si
Ti
In
Zr

N
P
Mn
As

O
S
Fe
Se

2.2 Newlands’ Octaves

Many limitation were found in Newlands’ octaves. This law was found to be applicable
only up to calcium. Newlands fitted all the known elements in a table of 7 X 8 that is 56
boxes. Newlands placed two elements each in some boxes to accommodate all the known
elements in the table. For example, Co and Ni, Ce and La. Moreover, he placed some
elements with different properties under the same note in the octave. For example,
Newlands placed the metals Co and Ni under the note ‘Do’ along with halogens, while Fe,
having similarity with Co and Ni, away from them along with the nonmetals O and S
under the note ‘Ti’. Also, Newlands’ octaves did not have provision to accommodate the
newly discovered elements. The properties of the new elements discovered later on did not
fit in the Newlands’ law of octaves.
Mendeleev’s Periodic table
The Russian scientist Dmitri Mendeleev developed the periodic table of elements
during the period 1869 to 1872 A.D. Mendeleev’s periodic table is the most important step
in the classification of elements. Mendeleev considered the fundamental property of
elements, namely, the atomic mass, as standard and arranged 63 elements known at that
time in an increasing order of their atomic masses. Then he transformed this into the
periodic table of elements in accordance with the physical and chemical properties of
these elements.

17

Mendeleev organized the periodic table on the basis of the chemical and physical
properties of the elements. These were the molecular formulae of hydrides and oxides of
the elements, melting points, boiling points and densities of the elements and their hydrides
and oxides. Mendeleev found that the elements with similar physical and chemical
properties repeat after a definite interval. On the basis of this finding Mendeleev stated
the following periodic law.
Properties of elements are periodic function of their atomic masses.
The vertical columns in the Mendeleev’s periodic table are called groups while the
horizontal rows are called periods.
Series

Group I
2
RO

Group II
RO

Group III
2 3
RO

Group IV
RH4
RO2

Group V
RH3
R2O5

Group
VI
RH2
RO3

Group VII
RH
R2O7

1

H=1

2

Li=7

Be=9.4

B=11

C=12

N=14

O=16

F=19

3

Na=23

Mg=24

Al=27.3

Si=28

P=31

S=32

Cl= 35.5

4

K=39

Ca=40

- = 44

Ti= 48

V=51

Cr= 52

Mn=55

5

(Cu=63)

Zn=65

-=68

-=72

As=75

Se=78

Br=80

6

Rb=85

Sr=87

?Yt=88

Zr=90

Nb=94

Mo=96

-=100

7

(Ag=108)

Cd=112

In=113

Sn=118

Sb=122

Te=125

J=127

8

Cs=133

Ba=137

?Di=138

?Ce=140

-

-

-

9

(-)

-

-

-

-

-

-

10

-

-

?Er=178

?La=180

Ta=182

W=184

-

11

(Au=199)

Hg=200

Ti=204

Pb=207

Bi= 208

-

-

12

-

-

-

Th=231

-

U=240

-

Group VIII
RO4

Fe=56, Co=59
Ni=59, Cu=63
Ru=104,Rh=104
Pd=106,Ag=108
----

Os=195, Ir=197
Pt=198, Au=199
---

2.3 Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

(The general molecular formulae of compounds shown as R2O, R2O3, etc. in the upper
part of Mendeleev’s periodic table, are written as R2O, R2O3,etc. in the present system.)
Introduction to scientist
Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907) was a professor in the St.
Petersburg University. He made separate card for every known
element showing its atomic mass. He arranged the cards in
accordance with the atomic masses and properties of the
elements which resulted in the invention of the periodic table
of elements.
Dmitri Mendeleev

18

1. There are some vacant places in the Mendeleev’s periodic table.
In some of these places the atomic masses are seen to be
Think about it
predicted. Enlist three of these predicted atomic masses along
with their group and period.
2. Due to uncertainty in the names of some of the elements, a
question mark is indicated before the symbol in the Mendeleev’s
periodic table. What are such symbols?
Merits of Mendeleev’s periodic table
Science is progressive. There is a freedom in science to revise the old inference by
using more advanced means and methods of doing experiments. These characteristics of
science are clearly seen in the Mendeleev’s periodic table.
While applying the law that the properties of elements are a periodic function of their
atomic masses, to all the known elements, Mendeleev arranged the elements with a thought
that the information available till then was not final but it could change. As a result of this,
Mendeleev’s periodic table demonstrates the following merits.
1. Atomic masses of some elements were revised so as to give them proper place in the
periodic table in accordance with their properties. For example, the previously determined
atomic mass of beryllium, 14.09, was changed to the correct value 9.4, and beryllium was
placed before boron.
2. Mendeleev kept vacant places in the periodic table for elements not discovered till
then. Three of these unknown elements were given the names eka-boron, eka-aluminum
and eka-silicon from the known neighbours and their atomic masses were indicated as
44, 68 and 72, respectively. Not only this but their properties were also predicted. Later
on these elements were discovered and named as scandium (Sc), gallium (Ga) and
germanium (Ge) respectively. The properties of these elements matched well with those
predicted by Mendeleev. See table 2.4. Due to this success all were convinced about the
importance of Mendeleev’s periodic table and this method of classification of elements
was accepted immediately.
Property
1. Atomic mass
2. Density (g/cm3)

eka- aluminum(E) (Mendeleev’s prediction)
68
5.9

Gallium (Ga)(actual)
69.7
5.94

3. Melting point(0C)

Low

30.2

4. Formula of chloride

ECl3

GaCl3

5. Formula of oxide

E2O3

Ga2O3

6. Nature of oxide

Amphoteric oxide

Amphoteric oxide

2.4 Actual and predicted properties of gallium.

3. There was no place reserved for noble
gases in Mendeleev’s original periodic
table. However, when noble gases such
as helium, neon and argon were
discovered towards the end of
nineteenth century, Mendeleev created
the ‘ zero’ group without disturbing the
original periodic table in which the
noble gases were fitted very well.

Use your brain power !
Chlorine has two isotopes,viz, C1-35 and C137. Their atomic masses are 35 and 37 respectively.
Their chemical properties are same. Where should
these be placed in Mendeleev’s periodic table? In
different places or in the same place?

19

Demerits of Mendeleev’s periodic table
1. The whole number atomic mass of the elements cobalt (Co) and nickel (Ni) is the same.
Therefore there was an ambiguity regarding their sequence in Mendeleev’s periodic
table.
2. Isotopes were discovered long time after Mendeleev put forth the periodic table. As
isotopes have the same chemical properties but different atomic masses, a challenge
was posed in placing them in Mendeleev’s periodic table.
3. When elements are arranged in an increasing order of atomic masses, the rise in atomic
mass does not appear to be uniform. It was not possible, therefore, to predict how many
elements could be discovered between two heavy elements.
4. Position of hydrogen : Hydrogen shows
Compounds of H Compounds of Na
similarity with halogens (group VII). For
example, the molecular formula of
NaCl
HCl
hydrogen is H2 while the molecular
Na2O
H2O
formulae of fluorine and chlorine are F2
H2S
Na2S
and Cl2, respectively. In the same way,
there is a similarity in the chemical
2.5 Similarity in hydrogen and alkali metals
properties of hydrogen and alkali metals
(group I). There is a similarity in the
Compounds
Element Compounds
molecular formulae of the compounds of (Molecular with metals with nonmetals
formula)
hydrogen alkali metals (Na, K, etc.)
formed with chlorine and oxygen. On
H2
NaH
CH4
considering the above properties it can not
CCl4
NaCl
Cl2
be decided whether the correct position of
hydrogen is in the group of alkali metals 2.6 : Similarity in hydrogen and halogens
(group I) or in the group of halogens (group VII).

Use your brain power !
1. Write the molecular formulae of oxides of the following elements by referring to the
Mendeleev’s periodic table. Na, Si, Ca, C, Rb, P, Ba, Cl, Sn.
2. Write the molecular formulae of the compounds of the following elements with hydrogen
by referring to the Mendeleev’s periodic table. C, S, Br, As, F, O, N, Cl
Modern Periodic Law
The scientific world did not know anything about the interior of the atom when
Mendeleev put forth the periodic table. After the discovery of electron, scientists started
exploring the relation between the electron number of an atom and the atomic number. The
atomic number in Mendeleev’s periodic table only indicated the serial number of the element.
In 1913 A.D. the English scientist Henry Moseley demonstrated, with the help of the
experiments done using X-ray tube, that the atomic number (Z) of an element corresponds
to the positive charge on the nucleus or the number of the protons in the nucleus of the atom
of that element. This revealed that ‘atomic number’ is a more fundamental property of an
element than its atomic mass. Accordingly the statement of the modern periodic law was
stated as follows:
Properties of elements are a periodic function of their atomic numbers.

20

Modern periodic table : long form of the periodic table
The classification of elements resulting from an arrangement of the elements in an
increasing order of their atomic numbers is the modern periodic table. The properties of
elements can be predicted more accurately with the help of the modern periodic table
formed on the basis of atomic numbers. The modern periodic table is also called the long
form of the periodic table.
In the modern periodic table the elements are arranged in accordance with their atomic
number. (see table 2.7) As a result, most of the drawbacks of Mendeleev’s periodic table
appear to be removed. However, the ambiguity about the position of hydrogen is not
removed even in the modern periodic table.
We have seen in the previous
standard that the electronic configuration
of an atom, the way in which the electron
are distributed in the shells around the
nucleus, is determined by the total
number of electrons in it; and the total
number of electrons in an atom is same
as the atomic number. The relation
between the atomic number of an element
and its electronic configuration is clearly
seen in the modern periodic table.
Structure of the Modern Periodic Table
The modern periodic table contains
seven horizontal rows called the periods
1 to 7. Similarly, the eighteen vertical
columns in this table are the groups 1 to
18. The arrangement of the periods and
groups results into formation of boxes.
Atomic numbers are serially indicated in
the upper part of these boxes. Each box
corresponds to the place for one element.

Use your brain power !
Position of the elements in the periodic
elements......

1. How is the problem regarding the
position of cobalt (59Co) and nickel
(59Ni) in Mendeleev’s periodic table
resolved in modern periodic table?
35
37
2. How did the position of 17Cl and 17C1
get fixed in the modern periodic table?
3. Can there be an element with atomic
mass 53 or 54 in between the two
elements, chromium 52
Cr and
24
manganese 55
Mn
?
25
4. What do you think? Should hydrogen
be placed in the group 17 of halogens
or group 1 of alkali metals in the
modern periodic table?

Apart from these seven rows, two rows are shown separately at the bottom of the
periodic table. These are called lanthanide series and actinide series, respectively. There
are 118 boxes in the periodic table including the two series. It means that there are 118
places for elements in the modern periodic table. Very recently formation of a few elements
was established experimentally and thereby the modern periodic table is now completely
filled. All the 118 elements are now discovered.
The entire periodic table is divided into four blocks,viz, s-block, p-block, d-block and
f-block. The s-block contains the groups 1 and 2. The groups 13 to 18 constitute the p-block.
The groups 3 to 12 constitute the d-block, while the lanthanide and actinide series at the
bottom form the f-block. The d-block elements are called transition elements. A zig-zag
line can be drawn in the p-block of the periodic table. The three traditional types of
elements can be clearly shown in the modern periodic table with the help of this zig-zag
line. The metalloid elements lie along the border of this zig-zag line. All the metals lie on
the left side of the zig-zag line while all the nonmetals lie on the right side.

21

Modern periodic Table and electronic
Configuration of Elements
Within a period the neighbouring elements
differ slightly in their properties while distant
elements differ widely in their properties.
Elements in the same group show similarity
and gradation in their properties. These
characteristics of the groups and periods in the
modern periodic table are because of the
electronic configuration of the elements. It is
the electronic configuration of an element
which decides the group and the period in which
it is to be placed.

Characteristics of Groups and
Periods
The characteristics of the groups
and periods in the periodic table are
understood by comparison of the
properties of the elements. Various
properties of all the elements in a
group show similarity and gradation.
However, the properties of elements
change slowly while going from one
end to the other (for example, from
left to right) in a particular period.

Groups and electronic configuration
1. Go through the modern periodic table (table no. 2.7) and write
the names one below the other of the elements of group 1.
Can you tell? 2. Write the electronic configuration of the first four elements in
this group.
3. Which similarity do you find in their configuration?
4. How many valence electrons are there in each of these elements?
You will find that the number of valence electrons in all these elements from the
group 1, that is, the family of alkali metals, is the same. Similarly, if you look at the
elements from any other group, you will find the number of their valence electrons to be
the same. For example, the elements beryllium (Be), magnesium (Mg) and calcium (Ca)
belong to the group 2, that is, the family of alkaline earth metals. There are two electrons
in their outermost shell. Similarly, there are seven electrons in the outermost shell of the
elements such as fluorine (F) and chlorine (Cl) from the group 17, that is, the family of
halogens. While going from top to bottom within any group, one electronic shell gets
added at a time. From this we can say that the electronic configuration of the outermost
shell is characteristic of a particular group. However, as we go down a group, the number
of shells goes on increasing.

Do you know ?
Uranium has atomic
number 92. All the elements
beyond uranium (with atomic
numbers 93 to 118) are
manmade. All these elements
are radioactive and unstable,
and have a very short life.

In the modern periodic table.......
1. Elements are arranged in an increasing order
of their atomic numbers.
2. Vertical columns are called groups. There are
18 groups. The chemical properties of the
elements in the same group show similarity
and gradation.
3. Horizontal rows are called periods. There are
in all 7 periods. The properties of elements
change slowly from one end to the other in a
period.

22

2.7 Table : Modern Periodic Table

s- block

p- block

Atomic No.
Symbol
Name
Atomic mass
d- block

*
f- block

#

Periods and electronic configuration
1. On going through the modern periodic table it is seen that the
Can you tell?
elements Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F and Ne belong to the period-2.
Write down electronic configuration of all of them.
2. Is the number of valence electrons same for all these elements?
3. Is the number of shells the same in these ?
You will find that
1
2
13
14
15
16
17
18
the number of valence
H
He
electrons is different in 1
1
2
these
elements.
Li
Be
Ne
B
C
N
O
F
However, the number 2 2,1
2,2
2,8
2,3
2,4
2,5
2,6
2,7
Mg
Ar
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
of shells is the same. 3 Na
2,8,1 2,8,2
2,8,3 2,8,4 2,8,5 2,8,6 2,8,7 2,8,8
You will also find that,
K
Ca
while going from left to 4 2,8,8,1 2,8,8,2
Sr
right, within the period,
5
the atomic number
Ba
increases by one at a 6
Ra
time and the number of
7
valence electrons also
increases by one at a
Potassium atom
Argon atom
time.
2.8 New period new shell

23

We can say that the elements with the same number of shells occupied by electrons
belong to the same period. The elements in the second period, namely, Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F
and Ne have electrons in the two shells, K and L. The elements in the third period, namely,
Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl and Ar have electrons in the three shells; K, L and M. Write down
the electronic configuration of these elements and confirm. In the modern periodic table,
electrons are filled in the same shell while going along a period from left to right, and at the
beginning of the next period a new electron shell starts filling up (See the table 2.8).
The number of elements in the first three periods is determined by the electron capacity
of the shells and the law of electron octet. (See the Table 2.9)
1. What are the values of ‘n’ for the shells K, L and M?
2. What is the maximum number of electrons that can be
accommodated in a shell? Write the formula.
3. Deduce the maximum electron capacity of the shells K, L and M.
As per the electron holding capacity of
Shell n
2n2 Electron Capacity
shells 2 elements are present in the first period
and 8 elements in the second period. The third
K
1
2x12
2
period also contains only eight elements due to
L
2
2x22
8
the law of electron octet. There are few more
M
3
2x32
18
factors which control the filling of electrons in
the subsequent periods which will be considered
32
N
4
2x42
in the next standards.

Can you recall ?

2.9 Electron Capacity of Electron shells

The chemical reactivity of an element is determined by the number of valence electrons
in it and the shell number of the valence shell. The information on these points is obtained
from the position of the element in the periodic table. That is, the modern periodic table has
proved useful for study of elements.
Periodic trends in the modern periodic table
When the properties of elements in a period or a group of the modern periodic table are
compared, certain regularity is observed in their variations. It is called the periodic trends in
the modern periodic table. In this standard we are going to consider the periodic trends in
only three properties of elements; namely, valency, atomic size and metallic- nonmetallic
character.
Valency : You have learnt in the previous standard that the valency of an element is
determined by the number of electrons present in the outermost shell of its atoms, that is, the
valence electrons.
1. What is the relationship between the electronic configuration
of an element and its valency?
Think about it
2. The atomic number of beryllium is 4 while that of oxygen is 8.
Write down the electronic configuration of the two and deduce
their valency from the same.
3. The table on the next page is made on the basis of the modern periodic table. Write in it the
electronic configuration of the first 20 elements below the symbol, and write the valency
(as shown in a separate box).
4. What is the periodic trend in the variation of valency while going from left to right within
a period? Explain your answer with reference to period 2 and period 3.
5. What is the periodic trend in the variation of valency while going down a group? Explain
your answer with reference to the group 1, group 2 and group 18.

24

Symbol
Electronic configuration
Valency

K
2, 8, 8, 1
1
19

1
1

18
2

13

14

15

16

17

2

Atomic size
You have seen in the previous 3
standards that size/volume is a fundamental 4
property of matter. The size of an atom is
indicated by its radius. Atomic radius is the distance between the nucleus of the atom and
its outermost shell.
Atomic radius is expressed in the unit picometer (pm) which is smaller than nanometer
(1 pm = 10-12 m).
:
O B C N Be Li
Some elements and their Element
Atomic radius (pm) : 66 88 77 74 111 152
atomic radii are given here.
Use your brain power !
1. By referring to the modern periodic table find
out the periods to which the above elements
belong.
2. Arrange the above elements in a decreasing
order of their atomic radii.
3. Does this arrangement match with the pattern
of the second period of the modern periodic
table?
4. Which of the above elements have the biggest
and the smallest atom?
5. What is the periodic trend observed in the
variation of atomic radius while going from
left to right within a period?
Element
: K Na
Atomic radius (pm): 231 186

Use your brain power !

Rb
244

Cs
Li
262 152

You will find that atomic radius
goes on decreasing while going from
left to right within a period. The
reason behind this is as follows.
While going from left to right within
a period, the atomic number
increases one by one, meaning the
positive charge on the nucleus
increases by one unit at a time.
However, the additional electron
gets added to the same outermost
shell. Due to the increased nuclear
charge the electrons are pulled
towards the nucleus to a greater
extent and thereby the size of the
atom decreases.
Some elements and their atomic
radii are given here.

1. By referring to the modern periodic table find out the
groups to which above the elements belong.

2. Arrange the above elements vertically downwards in an increasing order of atomic radii.
3. Does this arrangement match with the pattern of the group 1 of the modern periodic
table?
4. Which of the above elements have the biggest and the smallest atom?
5. What is the periodic trend observed in the variation of atomic radii down a group?
You will find that while going down a group the atomic size goes on increasing. This is
because while going down a group a new shell is added. Therefore the distance between the
outermost electron and the nucleus goes on increasing. As a result of this the atomic size
increases in spite of the increased nuclear charge.

25

Metallic- Nonmetallic Character
1. Look at the elements of the third period. Classify them
into metals and nonmetals.
Use your brain power !
2. On which side of the period are the metals? Left or right?
3. On which side of the period did you find the nonmetals?

1. decreasing atomic radius
2. increasing electronegativity and nonmetallic character
3. decreasing electropositivity and metallic character

Metal
Metalloid
Nonmetal

2.10 Periodic Trends in elements

26

1. increasing atomic radius
2. decreasing electronegativity and nonmetallic
character
3. Increasing electropositivity and metallic character

It is seen that the metallic elements like sodium, magnesium are towards the left. The
nonmetallic elements such as sulphur, chlorine are towards the right. The metalloid element
silicon lies in between these two types. A similar pattern is also observed in the other periods.
It is seen that the zig- zag line separates the metals from nonmetals in the periodic table.
Elements appear to have arranged in such a way that metals are on left side of this line,
nonmetals on the right side and metalloids are along the border of this line. How did this
happen?
Let us compare the characteristic chemical properties of metals and nonmetals. It is
seen from the chemical formulae of simple ionic compounds that the cation in them is
formed from a metal while the anion from a nonmetal. From this it is understood that metal
atoms have a tendency to form a cation by losing its valence electron, this property is called
electropositivity of an element. On the other hand an atom of a nonmetal has a tendency to
form an anion by accepting electrons from outside into its valence shell. We have already
seen that ions have a stable electronic configuration of a noble gas. How is the ability to lose
or accept electrons in the valence shell determined? All the electrons in any atom are held
by the attractive force exerted on them by the positively charged nucleus. Electrons in the
inner shells lie in between the valence shell and the nucleus. Because of their presence the
effective nuclear charge exerting an attractive force on the valence electrons is somewhat
less than the actual nuclear charge. Thus, the number of valence electrons in metals is small
(1 to 3). Also the effective nuclear charge exerting attractive force on the valence electrons
is small. As a combined effect of these two factors metals have a tendency to lose the
valence electrons to form cations having a stable noble gas configuration. This tendency of
an element called electropositivity is the metallic character of that element.

The periodic trend in the metallic character of elements is clearly understood from
their position is the modern periodic table. Let us first consider the metallic character of
elements belonging to the same group. While going down a group a new shell gets added,
resulting in an increase in the distance between the nucleus and the valence electrons. This
results in lowering the effective nuclear charge and thereby lowering the attractive force
on the valence electrons. As a result of this the tendency of the atom to lose electrons
increases. Also the penultimate shell becomes the outermost shell on losing valence
electrons. The penultimate shell is a complete octet. Therefore, the resulting cation has a
special stability. Due to this, the tendency of the atom to lose electrons increases further.
The metallic character of an atom is its tendency to lose electrons. Therefore, the following
trend is observed : The metallic character of elements increases while going down the
group.
While going from left to right within a period the outermost shell remains the same.
However, the positive charge on the nucleus goes on increasing while the atomic radius
goes on decreasing and thus the effective nuclear charge goes on increasing. As a result of
this the tendency of atom to lose valence electrons decreases within a period from left to
right (See Table 2.10).
The two factors namely, the increasing nuclear charge and decreasing atomic radius
as we go from left to right within a period, are responsible for increasing the effective
nuclear charge. Therefore, the valence electrons are held with greater and greater attractive
force. This is called electronegativity of an atom. Due to increasing electronegativity from
left to right within a period, the ability of an atom to become anion by accepting outside
electrons goes on increasing. The tendency of an element to form anion or the electro
negativity is the nonmetallic character of an element.

Always remember

Use your brain power !

1. While going downwards in any group the

1. What is the cause of nonmetallic
electropositivity of elements goes on increasing
character of elements?
while their electronegativity goes on decreasing.
2. What is the expected trend in the
2. While going from left to right in any period the
variation of nonmetallic character of
electronegativity of elements goes on increasing
elements from left to right in a period?
while their electropositivity goes on decreasing.
3. What would be the expected trend in
the variation of nonmetallic character 3. Larger the electropositivity or electronegativity
of the element higher the reactivity.
of elements down a group?
Gradation in Halogen Family
The group 17 contains the members of the halogen family. All of them have the
general formula X2. A gradation is observed in their physical state down the group. Thus,
fluorine (F2) and chlorine (Cl2) are gases, bromine (Br2 ) is a liquid while iodine (I2) is a
solid.

Internet my friend

Collect the information & 1. Inert gas elements.
2. Uses of various elements.
mail it

Read the following reference books from your library.
1. Understanding chemistry - C.N.R. Rao
2. The Periodic Table Book: A Visual Encyclopedia of the Elements

27

Do you know ?
M + 2H2O
M (OH)2 + H2
A general chemical equation indicating the reaction of alkaline earth metals is
Mg
Ca Sr Ba, the
given above. While going down the second group as Be
gradation in this chemical property of the alkaline earth metals is seen. While going
down the second group the reactivity of the alkaline earth metals goes on increasing
and thereby the ease with which this reaction takes place also goes on increasing.
Thus beryllium (Be) does not react with water. Magnesium (Mg) reacts with steam,
while calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr) and barium (Ba) react with water at room
temperature with increasing rates.

Exercise
1. Rearrange the columns 2 and 3 so as to match with the column 1.
Column 1
i. Triad
ii. Octave
iii. Atomic number
iv. Period
v. Nucleus
vi. Electron

Column 2
a. Lightest and negatively charged particle in all the
atoms
b. Concentrated mass and positive charge
c. Average of the first and the third atomic mass
d. Properties of the eighth element similar to the first
e. Positive charge on the nucleus
f. Sequential change in molecular formulae

2. Choose the correct option and
rewrite the statement.

d. In which block of the modern periodic
table are the nonmetals found?
(i) s-block
(ii) p-block
(iii) d-block
(iv) f-block

a. The number of electrons in the
outermost shell of alkali metals
is......
		

3.

(i) 1 (ii) 2 (iii) 3 (iv) 7

b. Alkaline earth metals have valency
2. This means that their position in
the modern periodic table is in .....
(i) Group 2 		
(ii) Group16
		

(iii) Period 2

Column 3
1. Mendeleev
2. Thomson
3. Newlands
4. Rutherford
5. Dobereiner
6. Moseley

An element has its electron
configuration as 2,8,2. Now answer
the following questions.
a. What is the atomic number of this
element?
b. What is the group of this element?
c. To which period does this element
belong?
d. With which of the following
elements would this element
resemble? (Atomic numbers are
given in the brackets)

(iv) d-block

c. Molecular formula of the chloride
of an element X is XCl. This 		
compound is a solid having high
melting point. Which of the 		
following elements be present in 		
the same group as X.

N (7), Be (4) , Ar (18), Cl (17)

(i) Na (ii) Mg (iii) Al (iv) Si

28

4. Write
down
the
electronic
configuration of the following
elements from the given atomic
numbers. Answer the following
question with explanation.
a. 3Li, 14Si, 2He, 11Na, 15P Which of these
elements belong to be period 3?
b. 1H, 7N, 20Ca, 16S, 4Be, 18Ar
		
Which of these elements
belong to the second group?
c. 7N, 6C, 8O, 5B, 13A1
		 Which
is
the
most
electronegative element among
these?
d. 4Be, 6C, 8O, 5B, 13A1
		 Which
is
the
most
electropositive element among
these?
e. 11Na, 15P, 17C1, 14Si, 12Mg
		
Which of these has largest
atoms?
f. 19K, 3Li, 11Na, 4Be
		
Which of these atoms has
smallest atomic radius?
g. 13A1, 14Si, 11Na, 12Mg, 16S
		
Which of the above elements
has the highest metallic character?
h. 6C, 3Li, 9F, 7N, 8O
		
Which of the above elements
has the highest nonmetallic
character?
5. Write the name and symbol of the
element from the description.
a. The atom having the smallest size.
b. The atom having the smallest
atomic mass.
c. The most electronegative atom.
d. The noble gas with the smallest
atomic radius.
e. The most reactive nonmetal.

6. Write short notes.
a. Mendeleev’s periodic law.
b. Structure of the modern periodic
table.
c. Position of isotopes in the
Mendeleev’s
and the modern
periodic table.
7. Write scientific reasons.
a. Atomic radius goes on decreasing
while going from left to right in a
period.
b. Metallic character goes on
decreasing while going from left to
right in a period.
c. Atomic radius goes on increasing
down a group.
d. Elements belonging to the same
group have the same valency.
e. The third period contains only eight
elements even through the electron
capacity of the third shell is 18 .
8. Write the names from the description.
a. The period with electrons in the
shells K, L and M.
b. The group with valency zero.
c. The family of nonmetals having
valency one.
d. The family of metals having
valency one.
e. The family of metals having
valency two.
f. The metalloids in the second and
third periods.
g. Nonmetals in the third period.
h. Two elements having valency 4.

Project
Find out the applications of all the
inert gases, prepare a chart and display it
in the class.

²²²

29

3. Chemical Reactions and Equations
Ø  
Chemical reactions
Ø  
Rules of writing chemical reaction
Ø  
Balancing a chemical equation Ø Types of chemical reactions

Can you recall?

1. What are the types of molecules of elements and compounds?
2. What is meant by valency of elements?

3. What is the requirement for writing molecular formulae of different compounds? How
are the molecular formulae of the compounds written?
In earlier standards we have seen how compounds are formed by chemical
combination of elements. We have also learnt that the driving force behind formation of a
chemical bond is to attain an electronic configuration with a complete octet. The atoms
attain a complete octet by giving, taking or sharing of electrons with each other.
Chemical Reaction
Some of the scientists of the 18th and 19th century carried out fundamental experiments
on chemical reactions. They proved from their experiments that during chemical reactions
composition of the matter changes and that change remains permanent. On the contrary
during physical change only the state of matter changes and this change is often temporary
in nature.
Identify physical and chemical changes from the phenomena given in the following table.
Phenomenon

Physical
change

Chemical
change

1. Transformation of ice into water.
2. Cooking of food.
3. Ripening of fruit.
4. Milk turned in to curd.
5. Evaporation of water.
6. Digestion of food in the stomach.
7. Size reduction of naphtha balls exposed to air.
8. Staining of Shahbad or Kadappa tile by lemon juice.
9. Breaking of a glass object on falling from a height.
3.1 Some common phenomenon
Note : Do the following activities in a group of friends. Take help of your teacher
wherever necessary.
Try this.

Apparatus: Thermometer, evaporating dish, tripod stand,
funnel, Bunsen burner, etc.

Chemicals : Lime stone powder, copper sulphate, calcium chloride, potassium chromate,
zinc dust, sodium carbonate, phthalic anhydride, etc.
Procedure : Carry out the activities 1 to 5 as given below. Read and record the temperatures
in the activities 2 to 4.

30

1. Take a spoonful of lime stone powder in an
evaporating dish. Heat it strongly on a high blue
flame.
2. Add zinc (Zn) dust into the copper sulphate
(CuSO4) solution.
3. Add potassium chromate (K2CrO4) solution to
barium sulphate (BaSO4) solution.
4. Add sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) solution to the
calcium chloride (CaCl2) solution.
5. Take phthalic anhydride in the evaporating dish.
Close the end of the stem of a funnel with a
cotton plug. Keep this funnel inverted on the
evaporating dish. Heat the evaporating dish on
a tripod stand slowly on a low flame. What did
you observe in the funnel during heating?

Lime stone
powder

Bunsen
burner

3.2 To heat lime stone powder

Record the observation of all the activities. What did you find?
Complete the following observation table with reference to the activities 1 to 5.
Activity

Colour
change
(if present)

Gas released
(yes/no)

Temperature
change
(if present)

Nature of change
(chemical /physical)

1
2
3
4
5
3.3 Observation table

Observe and keep a record of the physical and chemical changes
that you experience in your daily life.
A physical change takes place due to change in the parameters such as temperature,
pressure. Often a physical change in reversible. The composition of matter remains the
same in a physical change. For example, ice is transformed into water on heating and
water is transformed into ice on cooling. On the contrary, if the composition of matter
changes during a process then it is called a chemical change. When we call a particular
process or phenomenon as a chemical change, some chemical reactions are taking place
in the concerned matter.

Find out

A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances undergo bond breaking
and are transformed into new substances by formation of new bonds. The substances
taking part in chemical reaction are called reactants, whereas the substances formed as a
result of a chemical reaction by formation of new bonds are called products. For example,
formation of carbon dioxide gas by combustion of coal in air is a chemical reaction. In
this reaction coal (carbon) and oxygen (from air) are the reactants while carbon dioxide
is the product. A chemical reaction is represented by writing a chemical equation.

31

Chemical equations
Let us first look at a chemical reaction. In the activity 2, a colourless solution of zinc
sulphate (ZnSO4) is formed on addition of zinc dust to the blue solution of copper sulphate
(CuSO4). This chemical reaction can be written in brief as follows.
Aqueous solution of copper sulphate + zinc dust
									

Aqueous solution of zinc
sulphate + copper .......... (1)

This simple way of representing a chemical reaction in words is called a ‘Word Equation’.
A word equation can be written in a further condensed form by using chemical formulae
as follows.
				CuSO4 + Zn
ZnSO4 + Cu.................(2)
The representation of a chemical reaction in a condensed form using chemical formulae
is called as the chemical equation. In the above equation copper sulphate (CuSO4) and zinc
(Zn) are the reactants. They react with each other to form copper particles (Cu) and a
solution of the colourless zinc sulphate (ZnSO4) as the products having totally different
properties. The ionic bond in the reactant CuSO4 breaks and the ionic bond in the product
ZnSO4 is formed during the reaction.
Writing a Chemical Equation
Let us now see the conventions followed while writing a chemical equation.
1. In a chemical equation the reactants are written on the left hand side while the
products on the right hand side. An arrow heading towards the products is drawn in between
them. This arrow indicates the direction of the reaction.
2. If the reactants or products are two or more, they are linked with a plus sign (+) in
between them. For example, in the equation (2) a plus sign (+) is drawn in between the
reactants CuSO4 and Zn. Similarly, a plus sign (+) is drawn in between the products ZnSO4
and Cu.
3. To make the chemical equation more informative the physical states of the reactants
are indicated in the equation. Their gaseous, liquid and solid states are indicated by writing
the letters (g), (l) and (s), respectively in the brackets. Moreover, if the product is gaseous,
instead of (g) it can be indicated by an arrow pointing upwards. If the product formed is
insoluble solid, in the form of a precipitate, then instead of (s) it can be indicated by an
arrow pointing downwards. When reactants and products are in the form of solution in
water, they are said to be present in aqueous solution state. This state is indicated by putting
the letters aq in brackets after their formula. Thus, the equation (2) is rewritten as equation
(3) shown below.
CuSO4 (aq) + Zn (s)
ZnSO4 (aq) + Cu (s) ..................... (3)
4. When heat is to be given from outside to bring about a reaction, it is indicated by the
sign rwritten above the arrow that indicates the direction of the reaction. For example, the
reaction in which slaked lime is formed on heating lime stone is written as follows.
D
CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 ........................ (4)
Similarly, the fact that heat is released during the reaction between the aqueous solution
of copper sulphate and zinc dust is indicated as follows.
CuSO4 (aq) + Zn (s)
ZnSO4 (aq) + Cu (s) + Heat ..................... (5)
5. It is necessary to fulfill certain conditions like specific temperature, pressure, catalyst,
etc. to bring about some reactions. These conditions are indicated below or above the arrow
indicating the direction of the reaction. For example, the reaction of a vegetable oil takes
place at the temperature of 60 0C with hydrogen gas in presence of the Ni catalyst and is
written as follows.

32

Vegetable oil (l) + H2(g)

600 C
Ni Catalyst

Vanaspathi ghee (s)............. (6)

6 . Special information or names of reactants/ products are written below their
formulae. For example, copper on reaction with concentrated nitric acid gives reddish
coloured poisonous nitrogen di oxide gas.
Cu(s) + 4 HNO3(aq)

Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2NO2(g) + 2H2O(l) ...........(7)

(Concentrated)

However, on reaction with dilute nitric acid, the product formed is nitric oxide gas.
3Cu(s) + 8HNO3(aq)

(dilute)

Try this.

3Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2NO(g) + 4H2O(l) ...........(8)

Apparatus: Test tube, conical flask, balance, etc.
Chemicals : Sodium chloride and silver nitrate.

Procedure :
1. Take sodium chloride solution in a conical flask and silver nitrate solution in a test tube.
2. Tie a thread to the test tube and insert it carefully into the conical flask. Make the
conical flask air tight by fitting a rubber cork.
3. Weigh the conical flask with the help of a balance.
4. Now tilt the conical flask and mix the solution present in the test tube with the solution
in the conical flask.
5. Weigh the conical flask again.
Which changes did you find? Did any insoluble substance form? Was there any
change in the weight?
A word equation is written for the above activity as shown below.
Silver nitrate + Sodium chloride
Silver chloride + Sodium nitrate
The above word equation is represented by the following chemical equation.
AgNO3(aq)+ NaCl(aq)
			

AgCl + NaNO3(aq) ........ (9)
(white)

Silver nitrate solution

Test tube
Conical flask

Sodium chloride
solution

Balance

3.4 The reaction of sodium chloride with silver nitrate

Do you know ?
Find out

Silver nitrate is used in the voters-ink.

What are the other uses of silver nitrate in everyday life?

33

Balancing a Chemical Equation
Reactants
Products
Complete the table aside on the
(Left side)
(Right side)
basis of the equation (9).
Number of
Number of
It is seen that the number of atoms Element
atoms
atoms
of the elements in the reactants in this
Ag
equation is same as the number of
N
atoms of those elements in the products.
Such an equation is called a ‘balanced
O
equation’. If the number of atoms of
Na
each element is not the same on the two
Cl
sides of an equation, it is called an
3.5 Details of equation (9)
‘unbalanced equation’.
In any reaction, the total mass of each of the elements in the
reactants is same as the total mass of each of the respective
Always remember elements in the products. This is in accordance with the law of
conservation of mass that you studied in the previous standard.
Steps in balancing a chemical reaction
A chemical equation is balanced step by step. A trial and error method is used for this
purpose. Consider the following equation as an example :
Sodium sulphate + water.
Sodium hydroxide + Sulphuric acid
STEP I. Write the chemical equation from the given word equation.
Na2SO4+ H2O ..............(10)
NaOH + H2SO4
STEP II. Check whether the
Reactants
Products
equation (10) is balanced or not by
(Left side)
(Right side)
comparing the number of atoms of
the various elements present on the Element Number of atoms Number of atoms
Na
1
2
two sides of the equation.
It is seen that the number of
O
5
5
atoms of all the elements on the two
H
3
2
sides are not the same. It means that
S
1
1
the equation (10) is not balanced.
STEP III : It is convenient to start balancing an equation from the compound which
contains the maximum number of atoms. Moreover it is convenient to first consider that
element in this compound, which has unequal number of atoms on the two sides.

(i) In the equation (10), there are two
Number of
In the
In the
components Na2SO4 and H2SO4, which contain
sodium
Reactants
Products
the maximum number that is seven atoms each.
atoms
(in NaOH) (in Na2SO4)
Any one of them can be selected. Select the
Initially
1
2
compound Na2SO4. Further select sodium for
balancing as the number of atoms of sodium
To balance
1x2
2
in this compound is unequal on the two sides. It
should be remembered that, the formula of a compound cannot be changed while balancing
the number of atoms. It means that, here to make the number of sodium atoms in the
reactants as ‘2’ the formula NaOH cannot be changed to Na2OH. Instead a factor of ‘2’
will have to be applied to NaOH. Write down the resulting equation (10)/ on doing this.

34

2NaOH + H2SO4

Na2SO4+ H2O ..............(10)/

(ii) Check whether the equation (10)/ is balanced or not.
We find that the equation (10)/ is not balanced, as the number of oxygen and
hydrogen atoms are unequal on the two sides. First balance the hydrogen number as it
requires a smaller factor.
(iii) Apply a factor ‘2’ to the product ‘H2O’ for
Reactants
Products
balancing the equation (10)’
(Left side) (Right side)
Now write down the resulting equation (10)//.
Number of Number of
Element
atoms
atoms
2NaOH+ H2SO4
Na2SO4+2H2O .... (10)//
Na
2
2
(iv) Check whether the equation (10)// is
O
6
5
balanced or not. It is seen that the number of atoms
of all the elements are equal on both the sides. It
H
4
2
means that the equation (10)// is a balanced equation.
S
1
1
Step IV : Write down the final balanced
equation again.
2NaOH + H2SO4

Na2SO4+ 2H2O ....(11)

Number of
atoms of
Hydrogen

In this way, a balanced equation is obtained
from an unbalanced equation by applying proper i) Initially
factors to appropriate reactant/product so as to
ii) To balance
balance the number of each element in steps.

In the
In the
reactants
Products
(In NaOH
(In H2O)
& H2SO4)
4

2

4

2x2

1. (a) Identify the reactants and products of equation (6).
Use your brain power!

(b) Write down the steps in balancing the equation
N2(g) + H2(g)
NH3(g)

2. Write down a balanced chemical equation for the following reaction
Calcium sulphate + hydrogen chloride
Calcium chloride + Sulfuric acid
3.Write down the physical states of reactants and products in following reactions.
a. SO2 + 2H2S
3S + 2H2O
b. 2Ag + 2HCl
2AgCl + H2
We saw that in a chemical reactions reactants get converted into the new substances
called products. During this some chemical bonds in the reactants break and some new
chemical bonds are formed so as to transform the reactants into the products. In this
chapter we will be studying the types of reactions in detail.
Types of chemical reactions
Chemical reactions are classified into the following four types in accordance
with the nature and the number of the reactants and the products.
1. Combination reaction
Try this.

Apparatus: Test tube, glass rod, beaker, etc.
Chemicals: hydrochloric acid, ammonia solution, slaked lime, etc.

35

Activity 1: Take a small amount of hydrochloric acid in a test tube. Heat the test tube. Dip
a glass rod in the ammonia solution and hold on the top of the test tube. You will observe
a white smoke emanating from the tip of the glass rod.
What must have happened?
Due to heating HCl vapours started coming out from the test tube, and NH3 gas came
out from the solution on the glass rod. The ammonia gas and hydrogen chloride gas reacted
to form the salt ammonium chloride in gaseous state first, but immediately due to the
condensation process at room temperature it got transformed into the solid state. As a
result white smoke was formed. The chemical equation for this is as follows.
NH4Cl(s) ........................... (12)
NH3 (g)+ HCl (g)
Ammonia
Hydrogen chloride
Ammonium chloride
Activity 2: Hold a magnesium (Mg) strip in a pair of tongs and ignite. On burning in air
a white powder of magnesium oxide is formed. The reaction can be written in the form of
equation as shown below.
2 MgO ................................... (13)
2Mg + O2
In this reaction magnesium oxide is formed as the single product by combination of
magnesium and oxygen.
Activity 3: Take water in a beaker up to half of its capacity. Add a few pieces of slaked
lime (calcium oxide, CaO) to it. Calcium hydroxide (Ca (OH)2) is formed by combination
of calcium oxide and water with generation of large amount of heat.
Ca(OH)2 + Heat ..................... (14)
CaO
+
H 2O
Calcium oxide water
calcium hydroxide
1. What is the number of reactants in each of the above
reactions?
Use your brain power! 2. What is the number of molecules of reactants taking
part in the above reactions?
3. How many products are formed in each of the above
reactions?
When two or more reactants combine in a reaction to form a single product, it
is a combination reaction.
2. Decomposition reaction
Try this.

Apparatus: Evaporating dish, Bunsen burner, etc.
Chemicals : Sugar, calcium carbonate, sulphuric acid, etc.

Procedure: Take some sugar in an evaporating dish and heat it with the help of a Bunsen
burner. After some time you will see the formation of a burnt out black substance. Exactly
what must have happened in this activity?
In the above activity a single reactant sugar is divided into two substances (C and
H2O)
Heat
C12H22O11
12 C + 11H2O............................. (15)
Sugar
carbon
The reaction in which there is only one reactant giving rise to two or more products is
called a decomposition reaction.

36

Try this.

Apparatus : Two test tubes, bent tube, rubber cork, burner, etc.

Chemicals : Calcium carbonate, freshly
prepared lime water.
Procedure : Take some calcium carbonate
in a test tube. Fit a bent tube to this test
tube with the help of a rubber cork. Insert
the other end of the bent tube in the freshly
prepared lime water taken in the other test
tube. Heat the powdered calcium carbonate
in the first test tube strongly. The lime
water will turn milky.

Calcium
carbonate

Heating

Lime
water

3.6 Decomposition of calcium carbonate

We saw in the above activity that calcium carbonate undergoes decomposition
reaction and the carbon dioxide gas formed turns the lime water milky (Eq. 16). The
second product of the reaction, the calcium oxide powder, remains behind in the first test
tube. Similarly, in another reaction (Eq. 17) hydrogen peroxide naturally undergoes slow
decomposition into water and oxygen.
CaCO3(s)

D

CaO(s) + CO2 ..... (16)

2H2O2(l) ® 2H2O(l) + O2

.... (17)

(16) and (17) both are decomposition reactions.
Can you recall?

Is it possible to produce hydrogen by decomposition of water
by means of heat, electricity or light ?

We have studied in the previous standard that water decomposes into hydrogen and
oxygen gases on passing electric current through acidulated water. This decomposition
takes place by means of electrical energy. Therefore it is called electrolysis.
2H2O(l)

Electrical Energy

2H2 + O2 ......(18)

The chemical reaction in which two or more products are formed from a single
reactant is a ‘‘Decomposition reaction”.

Many degradation processes take place in the nature surrounding us. Organic
waste is decomposed by microorganisms and as a result manure and biogas are formed.
Biogas is used as a fuel.

37

3. Displacement reaction
We saw in the beginning of this chapter that on adding zinc dust to blue coloured
copper sulphate solution, a colourless solution of zinc sulphate is formed and heat is
generated. See the equation (3) for this reaction.
From that we learnt that the Zn2+ ions formed from Zn atoms take the place of Cu2+
ions in copper sulphate, and Cu atoms, formed from Cu2+ion come out. It means that Zn
displaces Cu from CuSO4.
The reaction in which the place of the ion of a less reactive element in a compound
is taken by another more reactive element by formation of its own ions, is called
displacement reaction.
(We will learn about reactivity of elements in the chapter on metallurgy.) The elements
iron and lead, similar to zinc, displace copper from its compound.

Use your brain power !

Complete the following reactions and give names of the
products.
1. CuSO4(aq) + Fe (s)

........... + .............

2. CuSO4(aq) + Pb(s)
........... + .............
4. Double displacement reaction
We have seen in the equation (9) that a white precipitate of silver chloride is formed
by an exchange of silver and sodium ions present in the reactants.
The reaction in which the ions in the reactants are exchanged to form a precipitate
is a double displacement reaction.
Recall the activity (3) in which you added potassium chromate (K2CrO4) into the
solution of barium sulphate (BaSO4).
1. What was the colour of the precipitate formed ?
2. Write the name of the precipitate.
3. Write down the balanced equation for this reaction.
4. Will you call this reaction a displacement reaction or a double displacement reaction.
Endothermic and Exothermic Processes and Reaction :
Heat is absorbed and given away in various processes and reactions. Accordingly
processes and reactions are classified as ‘Endothermic or Exothermic’.
Endothermic and Exothermic Processes
Heat from outside is absorbed during some physical changes. For example,
(i) melting of ice (ii) dissolution of potassium nitrate in water. Therefore, these are
‘Endothermic processes.’
On the other hand, heat is given away during some physical changes. For example,
(i) formation of ice from water, (ii) dissolution of sodium hydroxide in water. Therefore
these are ‘Exothermic processes.’ In the process of dilution of concentrated sulphuric
acid with water, very large amount of heat is liberated. As a result, water gets evaporated
instantaneously, if it is poured in to the concentrated sulphuric acid, which may cause an
accident. To avoid this, required amount of water is taken in a glass container and small
quantity of concentrated sulphuric acid at a time is added with stirring. Therefore, only a
small amount of heat is liberated at a time.

38

To carry out endothermic and exothermic processes
Try this.

Apparatus : Two plastic bottles, measuring cylinder, thermometer etc.
Chemicals : Potassium nitrate, sodium hydroxide, water etc.
(Sodium hydroxide being corrosive, handle it carefully in presence of
Teacher.)

Procedure : Take 100 ml water in each of the two plastic bottles. Plastic being insulator of
heat, the dissipation of heat can be prevented. Note the temperature of water in the bottles.
Put 5 g potassium nitrate (KNO3) in the bottle and shake well. Note the temperature of
the solution formed. Put 5 g sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in the other bottle. Shake the bottle
well. Note the temperature.
In the first bottle the process of dissolution of potassium nitrate took place while in
the second bottle the process of dissolution of sodium hydroxide took place. As per your
observation which one is exothermic process and which is an endothermic process?
During the process of the dissolution of KNO3 in water, heat from the surroundings
is absorbed and therefore the temperature of the resulting solution is less. The process in
which heat is absorbed from the outside, is called endothermic process. When the solid
NaOH is dissolved in water heat is given out, and therefore the temperature increases. The
processes in which heat is given out are called exothermic processes.
Endothermic and Exothermic Reactions
There is an exchange of heat in chemical reactions as well. Accordingly some chemical
reactions are exothermic while some other are endothermic. During exothermic chemical
reactions heat is given away when reactants are transformed into the products, while
during endothermic chemical reactions heat is either absorbed from the surroundings or
has to be supplied continuously from outside. For example,
CaCO3 (s) + heat
CaO (s) + CO2(g)
(Endothermic Reaction)
CaO (s) + H2O (l)
Ca(OH)2 (aq) + heat (Exothermic Reaction)

Use your brain power !
Rate of Chemical Reaction

1. What is the difference in the process of dissolution
and a chemical reaction ?
2. Does a new substance form when a solute dissolves
in a solvent ?

Take into account the time required for following processes.
Classify them into two groups and give titles to the groups.
1. Cooking gas starts burning on ignition .
2. Iron article undergoes rusting.
3. Erosion of rocks takes place to form soil.
4. Alcohol is formed on mixing yeast in glucose solution under proper condition.
5. Effervescence is formed on adding baking soda into a test tube containing dilute acid.
6. A white precipitate is formed on adding dilute sulphuric acid to barium chloride solution.
Can you tell?

It can be seen from the above examples that some reactions are completed in short
time, that is, occur rapidly, while some other require long time for completion, that is,
occur slowly. It means that the rate of different reactions is different.

39

The same reaction occurs at a different rate on changing the conditions. For
example, during winter long time is required for setting milk into curd, while at the higher
temperature during summer, the rate of setting of milk increases and the curd is formed
early.
Now let us see the factors which decide the rate of a chemical reaction.
Factors affecting the rate of a chemical reaction
a. Nature of the Reactants
Let us see the reaction of the metals aluminium (Al) and zinc (Zn) with dilute
hydrochloric acid.
On reaction of both Al and Zn with dilute hydrochloric acid H2 gas is liberated and
water soluble salts of these metals are formed. However, the reaction of aluminium metal
takes place faster as compared to zinc metal. The nature of the metal is responsible for
this difference. Al is more reactive than Zn. Therefore the rate of reaction of Al with
hydrochloric acid is higher than that of Zn. Nature or reactivity of reactants influences the
rate of a chemical reaction. (We are going to learn more about the reactivity of metals in
the chapter on Metallurgy.)
b. Size of the Particles of Reactants
Apparatus: Two test tubes, balance, measuring cylinder, etc.
Try this. Chemicals: Pieces of Shahabad tile, powder of Shahabad tile, dilute
HCl etc.
Procedure : Take pieces and powder of Shahabad tile in equal weights in two test tubes.
Add 10 ml dilute HCl in each of the test tubes. Observe whether effervescence of CO2 is
formed at a faster or slower speed.
You must have found in the above activity that the CO2 effervescence is formed slowly
with the pieces of Shahabad tile while at a faster speed with the powder.
The above observation indicates that the rate of a reaction depends upon the size of
the particles of the reactants taking part in the reaction. Smaller the size of the reactant
particles, higher is the rate of the reaction.
c. Concentration of the reactants
Let us consider the reaction of dilute and concentrated hydrochloric acid with CaCO3
powder.
Dilute HCl reacts slowly with CaCO3 and thereby CaCO3 disappears slowly and CO2
also liberates slowly. On the other hand the reaction with concentrated HCl takes place
rapidly and CaCO3 disappears fast.
Concentrated acid reacts faster than dilute acid, which means that rate of a reaction
is proportional to the concentration of reactants.
d. Temperature of the Reaction
While studying decomposition reaction, you have carried out decomposition of lime
stone. In this activity, the lime water does not turn milky before heating the lime stone;
because of the zero rate of reaction. From this it is learnt that the rate of a reaction increases
on increasing the temperature.

40

e. Catalyst
On heating potassium chlorate (KClO3) decomposes slowly.
		2KClO3

D 2KCl + 3O ....... (19)
2

The rate of the above reaction neither increases by reducing the particle size nor by
increasing the reaction temperature. However, KClO3 decomposes rapidly in presence of
manganese dioxide (MnO2) to liberate O2 gas. No chemical change takes place in MnO2
in this reaction.
“The substance in whose presence the rate of a chemical reaction increases,
without causing any chemical change to it, is called a catalyst.”
The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen takes place slowly at
room temperature (Eq. 17). However, the same reaction occurs at a faster rate on adding
manganese dioxide (MnO2) powder in it.
Do you know ?
1. One or more chemical reactions take place during every chemical change.
2. Some chemical reactions occur at fast speed whereas some occur at slow speed.
3. Strong acid and strong base react instantaneously.
4. In our body, enzymes increase the rate of physiological reactions.
5. Perishable foodstuff gets preserved longer in a refrigerator. The rate of decomposition
of foodstuff gets lowered due to low temperature, and its freshness is maintained.
6. Vegetables cook quickly on oil rather than on water.
7. The chemical reactions are profitable in the chemical factories if their rate is fast.
8. The rate of chemical reaction is important from environmental point of view as
well.
9. The ozone layer in the earth’s atmosphere protects the life on earth from the
ultraviolet radiation of the sun. The process of depletion or maintenance of this
layer depends upon the rate of production or destruction of ozone molecules.
Oxidation and Reduction
Many types of substances give reactions called oxidation and reduction. Let us learn
more about these reaction.
2Mg + O2
C + O2
MgH2
CH3- CH3

In the reactions (20) and (21) a
2MgO ..........(20)
reactant combines with oxygen, whereas
CO2 ..........(21)
in (22) and (23) hydrogen gas is removed
Mg + H2 .......(22)
from the reactant. All these are examples
CH2= CH2 + H2 ...(23) of the oxidation reaction.

The chemical reaction in which a reactant combines with oxygen or loses hydrogen
to form the product is called oxidation reaction.

41

Some oxidation reactions are brought about by use of specific chemical substances.
For example,
CH3 - CH2- OH
Ethyl alcohol

[O]
K2Cr2O7/H2SO4

CH3 - COOH ........ (24)
Acetic acid

Here the acidic potassium dichromate makes oxygen available for the oxidation of
the reactant ethyl alcohol. Such chemical substances which bring about an oxidation
reaction by making oxygen available are called oxidants or oxidizing agents.

Do you know ?
A variety of oxidants are used to bring about a controlled oxidation.
K2Cr2O7/H2SO4, KMnO4/H2SO4 are the commonly used chemical oxidants.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is used as a mild oxidant. Ozone (O3) is also a chemical
oxidant. Nascent oxygen is generated by chemical oxidants and it is used for the
oxidation reaction.
O3 ® O2 + [O]
H2O2 ® H2O + [O]
K2Cr2O7 + 4H2SO4® K2SO4 + Cr2 (SO4)3 +4H2O + 3 [O]
2KMnO4 + 3H2SO4 ® K2SO4 + 2MnSO4 + 3H2O + 5 [O]
Nascent oxygen is a state prior to the formation of the O2 molecule. It is the
reactive form of oxygen and is represented by writing the symbol as [O].
1. Which is the oxidant used for purification of drinking
water?
Use your brain power !
2. Why is potassium permanganate used during
cleaning water tanks?
We have seen just now that potassium permanganate is a chemical oxidant. Now
have a look at the following reaction.
K2SO4 + 2MnSO4 + 5Fe2(SO4)3 + 8H2O ........ (25)
2KMnO4 + 10FeSO4 + 8H2SO4
Which compound is oxidised by KMnO4 in presence of acid in this reaction? Of
course FeSO4.
Here FeSO4 is transformed into Fe2(SO4)3. Let us now see, how this conversion is an
oxidation reaction.
Fe2(SO4)3
2FeSO4
2+
2Ionic reaction
Fe + SO4
2Fe3+ + 3SO42The net change taking place in the above conversion is shown by the net ionic
reaction as shown below.
Net ionic reaction
Fe2+
Fe3+
			
(Ferrous) (Ferric)
This net ionic reaction represents the oxidation brought about by KMnO4.
When ferric ion is formed from ferrous ion the positive charge is increased by one unit.
While this happens the ferrous ion loses one electron. From this, we understand a new
defination of oxidation, which is “oxidation means losing one or more electrons.”

42

Look at the chemical equation (6). What is the type of this
reaction, in which Vanaspathi ghee is formed from vegetable oil?
The chemical reactions in which reactants gain hydrogen are called ‘reduction’
reactions. Similarly, the reaction in which a reactant loses oxygen to form the product
is also called reduction reaction. The substance that brings about reduction is called a
reductant, or a reducing agent.
When hydrogen gas is passed over black copper oxide a reddish coloured layer of
copper is formed.
Cu + H2O
............. (26)
CuO + H2
Can you tell?

Which is the reductant in this reaction? And which reactant has undergone reduction?
In this reaction an oxygen atom goes away from CuO (copper oxide), which means that
reduction of copper oxide takes place, whereas hydrogen molecule takes up oxygen atom
and water (H2O) is formed meaning, oxidation of hydrogen takes place. Thus oxidation
and reduction reactions occur simultaneously. The reductant is oxidized by the oxidant
and the oxidant is reduced by the reductant. Due to this characteristics of the reduction
and oxidation reactions, a single term ‘redox reaction’ is used in place of the two terms.
			

Redox Reaction = Reduction + Oxidation
1. Some more examples of redox reaction are as follows.
Identify the reductants and oxidants from them.

Use your brain power !
2H2S + SO2

3S + 2H2O ............... (27)

MnO2 + 4 HCl

MnCl2 + 2H2O + Cl2

............. (28)

2. If oxidation means losing electrons, what is meant by reduction?
3. Write the reaction of formation of Fe2+ by reduction Fe3+ by making use of the symbol (e-).

Think about it

The luster of the surface of the aluminium utensils in the house
is lost after a few days. Why does this happen?

When the positive charge on an atom or an
ion increases or the negative charge on them
decreases it is called oxidation, and when the
positive charge decreases or the negative charge
increases it is called reduction.
Fe

oxidation
reduction

FeO

oxidation
reduction

Fe2O3

43

Do you know ?
A redox reaction takes place
during cellular respiration. Here
the molecule of the enzyme
called cytochrome C oxidase
helps the transport of electron to
bring about this reaction.
For more information
refer to life processes in the
living organisms.

Corrosion
Try This.

Apparatus : Four test tubes, four small iron nails, rubber cork, etc.
Chemicals : Anhydrous calcium chloride, oil, boiled water, etc.

Procedure : Place four test tubes on a
test tube stand. Take some boiled water
1
in one test tube and put an oil layer on
it. Take some salt water in the second
test tube. Let there be only air in the
third test tube. Take some anhydrous
calcium chloride in the fourth test tube.
Place a small iron nail in every test
tube. Close the fourth test tube with a Oil layer on
rubber cork. Let all the four test tubes boiled water
remain un attended for a few days.

2

3

Salt
solution

4

Air Air and anhydrous
calcium chloride

3.7 To study rusting

Observe all the four test tubes after a few days. What did you find? Which test tubes
had the nails as before? Both water and air are necessary for rusting. The rusting process
takes place rapidly in presence of a salt. Have you seen the effect of redox reaction in
your everyday life? The new vehicles look shiny, on the contrary old vehicles look dull. A
certain type of reddish coloured solid layer collects on their metallic surface. This layer is
called ‘rust’. Its chemical formula is Fe2O3. X H2O.
The rust on iron does not form by a simple reaction of oxygen with iron surface.
The rust is formed by an electrochemical reaction. Different regions on the surface of iron
become anode and cathode.
1. Fe is oxidised to Fe2+ in the anode region.
Fe (s)
Fe2+ (aq) + 2 e2. O2 is reduced to form water in the cathode region.
O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4 e-

2H2O (l)

When Fe2+ ions migrate from the anode region they react with water and further get
oxidised to form Fe3+ ions.
A reddish coloured hydrated oxide is formed from Fe3+ ions. It is called rust. It collects
on the surface.
2Fe3+(aq) + 4H2O (l)

Fe2O3 . H2O (s) + 6H+ (aq)

........... (29)

Due to various components of atmosphere, oxidation of metals takes place,
consequently resulting in their damage. This is called ‘corrosion’. Iron rusts and a reddish
coloured layer is collected on it. This is corrosion of iron. Corrosion is a very serious
problem . We are going to study about it in the ‘metallurgy’ chapter.

Find out

How are the blackened silver utensils and patinated (greenish) brass
utensils cleaned?

44

Rancidity
When we use old, left over cooking oil for making food stuff, it is found to have
foul odour called rancidity. If food is cooked in such oil, its taste also changes. When oil
or ghee is left aside for a long time or fried food is left aside for a long time it undergoes
air oxidation and becomes rancid. Rancidity in the food stuff cooked in oil or ghee is
prevented by using antioxidants. The process of oxidation reaction of food stuff can also
be slowed down by storing it in air tight container.

Exercise
1.

2.

Choose the correct option from the
bracket and explain the statement
giving reason.
(Oxidation, displacement, electrolysis,
reduction, zinc, copper, double
displacement, decomposition)

3.

a. To prevent rusting, a layer of ........
metal is applied on iron sheets.
b. The conversion of ferrous sulphate
to ferric sulphate is ........ reaction.
c. When electric current is passed
through acidulated water ........ of
water takes place.
d. Addition of an aqueous solution of
ZnSO4 to an aqueous solution of
BaCl2 form a white precipitate is
an example of ....... reaction.
Write answers to the following.

4.

a. What is the reaction called when
oxidation and reduction take place
simultaneously? Explain with one
example.
b. How can the rate of the chemical
reaction, namely, decomposition of
hydrogen peroxide be increased?
c. Explain the term reactant and
product giving examples.
d. Explain the types of reaction with
reference to oxygen and hydrogen.
Illustrate with examples.
e. Explain the similarity and difference
in two events, namely adding NaOH
to water and adding CaO to water.

5.

Explain the following terms with
examples.
a. Endothermic reaction
b. Combination reaction
c. Balanced equation
d. Displacement reaction
Give scientific reasons.
a.When the gas formed on heating
limestone is passed through freshly
prepared lime water, the lime water
turns milky.
b. It takes time for pieces of Shahabad
tile to disappear in HCl, but its
powder disappears rapidly.
c.While preparing dilute sulphuric
acid from concentrated sulphuric
acid in the laboratory, the
concentrated
sulphuric acid is
added slowly to water with constant
stirring.
d. It is recommended to use air tight
container for storing oil for long
time.
Observe the following picture a
write down the chemical reaction
with explanation.
Collected rust

Cathode

Water drop

Anode

Iron

45

6. Identify from the following reactions the reactants that undergo oxidation and
reduction.
a. Fe + S

FeS

b. 2Ag2O

4 Ag + O2

c. 2Mg + O2

2MgO

d. NiO + H2

Ni + H2O

7. Balance the following equation stepwise.
a. H2S2O7(l) + H2O(l)
H2SO4(l)
b. SO2(g) + H2S(aq)
S(s) + H2O (l)
c. Ag(s) + HCl(aq)
AgCl + H2
d. NaOH (aq) + H2SO4(aq)
Na2SO4(aq) + H2O(l)
8. Identify the endothermic and exothermic reaction.
a. HCl + NaOH

NaCl + H2O + heat

b. 2KClO3(s) 		 D

2KCl(s) + 3O2

c. CaO + H2O 		

Ca(OH)2 + heat

d. CaCO3(s)

D

CaO(s) + CO2

9. Match the column in the following table.
Reactants

Products

Type of chemical reaction

BaCl2 (aq) + ZnSO4 (aq)

H2CO3(aq)

Displacement

2AgCl(s)

FeSO4 (aq)+ Cu (s)

Combination

CuSO4 (aq) + Fe (s)

BaSO4 + ZnCl2 (aq)

Decomposition

H2O(l) + CO2(g)

2Ag(s) + Cl2(g)

Double displacement

Project
Prepare aqueous solutions of various solid salts available in the laboratory.
Observe what happens when aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide is added to
these. Prepare a chart of double displacement reactions based on these observation.

²²²

46

4. Effects of electric current
Ø
Ø
Ø

Energy transfer in electric circuit.
Heating effects of electric current.
Magnetic effects of electric current.

1. How do we decide that a given material is a good conductor
of electricity or is an insulator?
Can you recall?
2. Iron is a conductor of electricity, but when we pick up a piece
of iron resting on the ground, why don’t we get electric shock?
We have learnt in earlier standards about static electricity. We performed various
experiments regarding negatively and positively charged objects. The reason behind the
object becoming positively and negatively charged is the transfer of negatively charged
particles from one object to another object. In previous standard, we also studied about
electric current.
In this chapter, we will study about an electric current flowing through a conducting
wire, an electric current flowing through a resistor, electromagnetic induction, electric
motor and generator.
Observe and Discuss

What do you observe in the following pictures?
Which effects of electric current do you find?

a

b

c

4.1 Effects of electric current

Energy transfer in an electric circuit
Try this

Materials: connecting wires, electric cells, electrical resistance,
voltmeter, ammeter, plug key.

Procedure: Connect the circuit as shown in the accompanying figure 4.2 after taking
the components with proper values. Measure the current (I). Also measure the potential
difference (VAB) between the two ends (A and B) of the resistance.
The potential at A is higher than the potential at B as the point A is connected to the
positive electrode of the cell and the point B to the negative electrode of the cell.

47

I

(.)
+

+

VAB

A
V

R

-

B

+

-

A

-

If a charge Q flows from A to B, work VAB Q,
has been done on Q while going from A to B (Refer
to chapter 3 of std 9). From where does the energy
come to do this work? The source of energy is the
cell. The cell gives this energy through the charge
Q to the resistance where work VAB Q is performed.
If the charge Q flows from A to B in time t, i.e. the
work is performed in time t, then during that time
the energy VAB Q is given to the resistor.
What happens to this energy? This energy is
received by the resistor and is converted into heat
energy, the temperature of the resistor is increased.

4.2 Electric circuit

Use your brain power !
P = Electrical power =

If in the circuit, the resistor is replaced by a motor,
in which form will the energy given by the cell get
transformed into?

VAB Q
Energy
\ Q =I
=
= V AB I...................(1)
,
Time required
t
t

The source of energy, the cell, gives in time t, the energy P x t to the resistor. If I is the
current flowing continuously through the circuit, the heat produced in the resistor in time t
will be
H = P x t = VAB x I x t ................................ (2)
According to Ohm’s law,
VAB = I x R ................................................ (3)
t
H = V2AB × R .......................................... (4)
Similarly, H = I x I x R x t = I2 x Rt ......... (5)
H = I2 x R x t is called Joules law of heating
Unit of electrical power
P = VAB x I = Volt x Amp ........................... (6)
1 Volt x 1 Amp =
1J
1s

1J x 1C ............... (7)
1C
1s

= W (watt) ...................................... (8)

Think about it
How can we write mechanical power in a manner similar to
the electrical power?

Thus the unit of electrical power is 1W (watt).
Heating effect of electric current
When a resistor is connected in an electrical circuit, heat is produced in it due to the
current. This is known as the heating effect of current.

48

Coiled coil

Coil (Solenoid type)

Equipment such as water boiler, electric cooker,
electric bulb make use of the heating effect of
electric current. Electrical conductors having higher
resistivity are used here. For example, a coil made
up of an alloy Nichrome is used in the electric
heater-cooker as a resistor, while a tungsten wire is
used in an electric bulb. Because of the current, this
wire gets heated (to nearly 3400 0C) and emits light.
The hot wire also radiates heat to a certain extent.

Always remember

Coil of cooker

Glass Bulb

Coil of Heater
Solenoid Type
coil

The unit of electric power 1W is a very small
unit, hence 1000 W or 1 kW is used as a unit to
measure electric power, in practice. If 1 kW
power is used for 1 hour, it will mean 1kW ´ 1 hr
of electrical energy is used (see equation 1)
1kWh =1 kilowatt hour = 1000 W × 3600 s
= 3.6 × 106 Ws = 3.6 x 106 J

Several times we hear or read about a
building catching fire due to short circuit.
Sometimes, if we switch on an equipment in our
house, the electrical fuse wire melts and the
Glass Support
Vacuum/
nitrogen gas electric supply shuts down. Let us discuss about
Screw cap
the cause briefly. The home electrical connection
consists of ‘live’, ‘neutral’ and ‘earth’ wires.
4.3 Uses of coil
The ‘live’ and the ‘neutral’ wires have potential
difference of 220V. The ‘earth’ is connected to
Find out
ground. Due to a fault in the equipment or if the
plastic coating on the ‘live’ and the ‘neutral’
Check monthly electricity
wires gives way, the two wires come in contact
bill received from the electricity
with each other and a large current flows through
distribution Co. Ltd. Observe
it producing heat. If any inflammable material
various details and get
(such as wood, cloth, plastic etc.) exists around
information about them. The
that place it can catch fire. Therefore, a fuse wire
electricity bill specifies the
is used as a precautionary measure. We have
usage in ‘Units’. What is this
learnt about fuse wire in the previous standard.
unit? When 1 kWh electrical
As soon as high current flows in a circuit, the
energy is used, it is termed as 1
fuse wire melts and breaks the circuit and any
unit of energy.
mishap is avoided.

49

Many times particularly in the summer season, huge electrical power is used in the
evenings due to home lighting, fans, air conditioners, use of electricity in shops etc. As a
result, excessive current is drawn from the transformer supplying the electricity, and if the
capacity of the transformer is insufficient, its fuse wire melts and the supply gets shut
down. Such events occur due to overloading.

Do you know ?
These days miniature circuit
breakers (MCB) switches are used in
homes. When the current in the circuit
suddenly increases this switch opens
and current stops. Different types of
MCBs are in use. For the entire house,
however the usual fuse wire is used.

4.4 Different types of fuses in use

Solved examples
Example 1. A 6 m long wire made from an Example 2. A cell is connected to a 9 ohm
alloy, nichrome, is shaped into a coil and resistance, because of which heat of 400 J
given for producing heat. It has a resistance is produced per second due to current
of 22 ohms. Can we get more heat if the flowing through it. Obtain the potential
wire is cut into half of its original length difference applied across the resistance.
and shaped into a coil? For getting energy, Given:
the two ends of the wire are connected to a
Heat at 400 J per second means
source with a potential
difference of 220V.
Given : Resistance 22 ohm, potential
400 J
P=
difference = 220 V
1s
A. Coil of whole wire.				
V2
2
P
=
2
(220)
V
R
P = R = 22 = 2200 watts
V2
400
=
B. Coil of half-length wire
9
(220)2
V2
400 x 9 = V2
P= R
=
= 4400 watts
11
\V=
(400 x 9) = 20 x 3 = 60 V
This means that more heat will be obtained
after cutting the wire into half.

50

Example 4. An electric tungsten bulb is
connected into a home circuit. The home
electric supply runs at 220 V potential difference. When switched on, a current of
0.45 A flows through the bulb. What must
be power (wattage) of the bulb? If it is kept
on for 10 hours, how many units of electricity will be consumed?

Example 3. An electrical iron uses a power
of 1100 W when set to higher temperature.
If set to lower temperature, it uses 330 W
power. Find out the electric current and the
respective resistances for the two settings.
The iron is connected to a potential
difference of 220 V.
Given: potential difference = 220 V.
Power P = (A) 1100 W, (B) = 330 W.
A. Power = 1100 W.
1100
P
=
= 5A
I1 =
220
V
B. Power = 330 W
330
P
=
= 1.5 A
I2 =
220
V
220
V
= 44 W
Resistance R1 =
=
5
I1
Resistance R2 =

Given : Potential difference = 220 V.
Current = 0.45 A.
Power (W) = Potential difference(V)
		
x Current (A)
= 220 x 0.45 W
= 99 W.
The bulb must be of power 99 W.
In 10 hrs,
99 W x 10 h =990 Wh.
= 0.99 kWh.

220
V
= 146 W
=
1.5
I2

Magnetic effect of electric current
We have learnt about heating effect of electric current. In previous standards, we have
studied about magnets and magnetic lines of force. However, it will be interesting to see
if an electric current and magnetic field are related to each other.

Try this
Connect the circuit as
Plug
Plug
shown in figure 4.5. Connect
key
key
a copper wire, thicker and
straight as compared to the
connecting wires, between A
and B. Keep a magnetic
needle adjacent to the wire.
Keep the plug key open in
the circuit and observe the
direction of the needle. Close
B
B
A
the plug key and observe the A
direction of the needle. What
do you notice? Now
interchange the connecting
wires connected to the cell
and observe the direction of
Magnetic needle
Magnetic needle
the magnetic needle. Do you
notice any relation between
the direction of current and
4.5 Magnetic effects of a current
position of the needle?

51

What do you learn from
this
experiment?
The Introduction of Scientist
As a scientist at the forefront
magnetic effect is observed
in the 19th century, Hans Christian
because of the current in the
Oersted played an important role in
wire. This means electricity
understanding ‘electromagnetism’.
and magnetism are closely
He observed, in 1820, that when a
related! On the contrary, if a
current passes through a metal wire,
magnet is moved and kept
moving, will we observe any
the magnetic needle near the wire
electric effect? Is it not
turns through a certain angle. He
exciting? Therefore, we are
pointed out the relation between
going to study magnetic fields
electricity and magnetism. Today’s
and such ‘electromagnetic’
advanced technology is developed
Hans Christian
effects. Finally, we will study
the principles, construction Oersted (1777-1851) as a consequence. In his honour, the
unit of intensity of the magnetic
and working of electric motor
field is termed as Oersted.
and electric generator.

R
Try this
Connect the circuit as shown in
fig. 4.6 When a large current
(approximately 1A or more) flows
through the thick copper wire passing
through a cardboard, the magnetic
needle kept at different points on the
cardboard around the wire stands in
different directions. Mark these
directions with a pencil.
(Discuss with your friends and teachers
about the requirement of the current,
number of cells, cells of what potential
difference, thickness of the wire etc.,
and then perform the experiment). The
direction of the current shown in the
circuit is its conventional direction.
What changes are caused by
increasing or decreasing current? What
do you see when the magnetic needle is
kept a little away from the wire? Now,
instead of the magnetic needle, spread
iron filings on the cardboard and
observe. The iron filings arrange
themselves in a circular manner around
the wire. Why does this happen?
You have studied magnetism and
magnetic field in previous standard.
The iron filings spread along the
magnetic lines of force.

Card
board

Thick copper wire

Magnetic
needle
Iron filings
4.6 Magnetic field produced around the conductor

Always remember
A magnetic field is produced around a
straight current carrying conductor. If the
current is unchanged, this magnetic field
reduces as the distance from the wire
increases. Therefore, the concentric circles
representing the magnetic lines of force are
shown bigger and rarefied as the distance
from the wire increases. If the current through
the wire is increased, the intensity of the
magnetic field increases.

52

Right hand thumb Rule
Electric
current

Right
hand

Magnetic
field

This is a convenient rule for finding out the
direction of the magnetic field produced by a current
flowing through an electrical conductor. Imagine that
you have held the conductor in your right hand in
such a way that your thumb points in the direction of
the current. Then turn your fingers around the
conductor, the direction of the fingers is the direction
of the magnetic lines of force (Fig. 4.7).
Find Out
The right hand thumb rule is called Maxwell’s
cork-screw rule. What is the cork-screw rule?

4.7 Right hand thumb Rule

Magnetic field produced by current through a circular loop of a conducting wire.
We learnt about the magnetic lines of
force of a magnetic field produced by a
current flowing through a straight conductor. What will happen to the magnetic lines
of force of the field produced by a current
flowing through a loop made by bending
the straight wire?

I Conductor

loop

Magnetic lines

N
Q

P

S

A circuit is completed by connecting
various components as shown in the figure
4.8. If the current passes through the loop,
magnetic lines of force are produced at
each point on the loop. As we go away
from the wire, the concentric circles
representing the magnetic lines of force
will become bigger and bigger.

Cardboard
R
+

As we go towards the centre of the
loop the circle become so big that its arc
can be shown as a straight line.

A

+

4.8 Magnetic field produced by a current
through a loop of conducting wire

In fig. 4.8, the magnetic lines of force are shown near the points P and Q only, however,
they will be created near each point on the loop. Likewise, each point will produce magnetic
field at the centre of the loop.
By making use of the right hand thumb rule, check that every point on the loop
contributes the magnetic lines of force at the centre of the loop and these lines of force at
the centre of the loop are in the same direction.

53

The intensity of magnetic field at any point produced by a current flowing through a
wire, is dependent on the current, as we have seen in the experiment (fig 4.6 Try this). This
means that if there are n turns in the loop, the magnetic field n times of that produced by
a single loop will be created.
On discussing with your teachers, with their guidance, see if you can perform the
above experiment by collecting appropriate materials. The direction of the magnetic field
can be determined with the help of a magnetic needle.
Magnetic field due to a current in a solenoid.
When a copper wire with a resistive
coating is wound in a chain of loops (like a
spring), it is called solenoid.
Whenever an electric current passes
through a solenoid, magnetic lines of force are
produced in a pattern as shown in figure 4.9.
You are aware of the magnetic lines of
force of a bar magnet. The properties of the
magnetic field of a solenoid are very similar to
the magnetic field produced by a bar magnet.
One of the open ends of a solenoid acts as
a magnetic north pole and the other as the
magnetic south pole. The magnetic lines of
force inside the solenoid are parallel to each
other. What does this mean?

Magnetic
lines of
force
Solenoid

S

N

4.9 Magnetic lines of force of a magnetic
field produced by a current passing
through a solenoid coil.

This means that the intensity of the magnetic field within the solenoid is uniform
everywhere, i.e. the magnetic field in a solenoid is uniform.
Force acting on current carrying conductor in a magnetic field
Materials: Flexible copper wire, stand, electric cell, a horse shoe
magnet with a strong magnetic field.
Procedure : Using the stand, fix the copper wire so that it passes through the poles of the
horse shoe magnet as shown in the figure 4.10. Connect the circuit as well. What do you
observe?
Whenever a current is not flowing through the wire, it remains straight (position A).
When the current flows from top to bottom, the wire bends and comes into position C.
If the current direction is reversed, i.e. it flows from the bottom to the top end, the wire
bends but comes in the position B. This means the direction of the force on the wire is
perpendicular to both the magnetic field and the direction of the current.
Here, the direction of magnetic field is from N to S, (H). In this experiment it is noted
that whenever current flows through a conductor in the presence of magnetic field a force
is exerted on the conductor. If the direction of the current is reversed, the direction of the
force also gets reversed. If the magnet is kept reversed, i.e. its south pole is brought at the
position of its North pole and its North pole brought to the position of its south pole, what
will happen?

Try this

54

Stand

The above experiment clearly shows that a force is exerted
on the current carrying conductor. The direction of this force
depends on both the direction of the current and the direction
of the magnetic field.
Experimentally, it is possible to show that this force is
maximum when the direction of the current is perpendicular
to the direction of the magnetic field. How will you do this?

I

I
S
N

H
A

Copper wire

B C

A

Magnet

B

C
Magnetic field
(perpendicular
to the plane
of the paper,
going inside
the paper)

Experimental Setup

Schematic Diagram
4.10 Force acting on a current carrying conductor in the presence of a magnetic field

Fleming’s left hand rule
In the above experiment we considered
the direction of the electric current and the
direction of the magnetic field and found
that the direction of the force exerted is
perpendicular to both. There is a simple
rule relating these three directions. This
rule is called Fleming’s left hand rule.
According to this rule, the left hand thumb,
index finger, and the middle finger are
stretched so as to be perpendicular to each
other. If the index finger is in the direction
of the magnetic field, and the middle finger
points in the direction of the current, then
the direction of the thumb is the direction
of the force on the conductor.
Try this.

Electric Motor

Force on the
conductor
(Thumb)

Direction of the
magnetic field
(Index finger)

Direction of
current
(Middle finger)
Force on the
conductor

Direction of current

Direction
of the
magnetic
field

Determine the direction of 4.11 Fleming’s left hand rule
the force on the wire in the above
experiment and verify your
finding.

You know various forms of energy. You also
know that energy can change its form. A device
changing electrical energy into mechanical
energy is known as electric motor. Around us, in
our day-to day life, an electric motor is a boon.
It is used in fans, refrigerators, mixers, washing
machines, computers, pumps, etc. How does this
motor work?

55

4.12 Electric motor in daily use

The electric motor consists of
rectangular loop of copper wire having
resistive coating. As shown in the figure,
it is placed between the north pole and
south pole of a magnet (such as a horse
shoe magnet) in such a way that its
branches AB and CD are perpendicular
to the direction of magnetic field. The
two ends of the loop are connected to the
two halves (X and Y) of the split ring.
The two halves of the ring have resistive
coating on their inner surfaces and are
tightly fitted on the axle. The two halves
of the split ring, X and Y, have their
outer conducting surfaces in contact
with the two stationary carbon brushes,
(E and F), respectively.

Split rings
(X and Y)

Carbon
brushes
(E and F)

X Y

E

F

Axle

4.13 Electric motor: Principle and Working

When the circuit is completed as shown in the figure, the current flows in the branch
AB of the loop from A to B through the carbon brushes E and F. Since the direction of the
magnetic field is from north pole to south pole, according to the Fleming’s left hand rule,
a force is exerted on the branch AB and pushes it down. The current in the CD branch is
in a opposite direction to that in the AB branch, and therefore, a force is exerted on the
branch CD in upward direction. Thus, the loop and the axle start rotating in an anticlockwise
direction. After half rotation, the two halves of the split ring X and Y come in contact with
carbon brushes F and E, respectively, and the current in a loop starts flowing in the direction
DCBA. Therefore, a force is exerted on the branch DC in downward direction and on the
branch BA in the upward direction, and the loop continues to rotate in the anticlockwise
direction. Thus, the current in the loop is reversed after each half rotation and the loop and
the axle continue to rotate in the anticlockwise direction.
Commercial motors run on the same principle, but practical changes are made in their
construction; you will learn that later.
Find Out

Why are carbon brushes used? How do these work? In
order to find answers to such questions, visit a nearby workshop
and try to understand the construction of an electric motor.

Electromagnetic Induction
We have seen in the previous section that if we keep an electric conductor in a magnetic
field such that direction of the current flowing through the conductor in perpendicular to
the magnetic field, then a force is exerted on the conductor. Because of this, the conductor
moves. But if an electric conductor is moving in a magnetic field or the magnetic field
around a stationary conductor is changing, what will happen? In order to find out an
answer to this question, research was done by the great scientist Michael Faraday. In the
year 1831 Faraday showed that an electric current can be produced in a conductor with the
help of a moving magnet.

56

Galvanometer
Galvanometer is a sensitive device which works on
the same principle as that of an electric motor that we
have studied earlier. We can make some electrical
measurements with it. A coil is positioned between the
pole pieces of a magnet in such a way that the pointer on
the galvanometer dial is connected to it. When a small
current (for example 1 mA) flows through the coil, the coil
will rotate. The rotation will be proportional to the current.
Voltmeter and Ammeter also work on the same principle.
In galvanometer, the pointer deflects on both the sides of
the zero mark depending on the direction of the current.

Try this.
B
A
Magnet

4.14 Galvanometer

Collect the material as shown in figure
4.15. Complete the circuit by connecting the
galvanometer. Keep the bar magnet erect in
such a way that its north or south pole is just
below the copper wire. Now if the wire is
B , the pointer
kept moving from A
of the galvanometer gets deflected. This is
called Faraday’s electromagnetic induction.
Now move the magnet with the wire fixed.
The Galvanometer pointer still gets deflected.
Coil

Solenoid coil

4.15 If a conducting wire is kept moving in a
magnetic field, a current is produced in it.

Try this.

Galvanometer

Battery

4.16 (a) When the current in the solenoid
coil is switched on or off

Complete the circuit as shown in figure
4.16a. Discuss about and select the
components as required. In this experiment,
if we open the plug key and make the current
zero in the coil, the pointer of the
Galvanometer deflects to a side and quickly
comes back to zero. If the current in the coil
is started again, the pointer again deflects to
the other side and then returns quickly to
zero.
Now when the electrical current is
flowing through the solenoid coil and the
solenoid coil is displaced with respect to the
coil, the current is still produced in the coil.

Coil

Galvanometer

Solenoid coil

Battery

4.16 (b) when a current is passing through
the solenoid coil and the coil is displaced
laterally with respect the coil

57

What can be inferred from these two
experiments?
Coil
Solenoid coil
Even if the solenoid coil is kept stationary, a
change in current in the solenoid coil produces a
current in the coil. If the solenoid coil is moved
towards or away from the coil, we see a
deflection in the Galvanometer (fig 4.16c) Also,
the faster is the displacement of the solenoid,
larger is the deflection of the Galvanometer
pointer. If the current in the solenoid coil is
changed, a current is produced in the coil or if
Galvanometer
Battery
the solenoid coil is moved towards the coil, then
4.16 c) When a current passing
also a current is produced in the coil.
through the solenoid coil and the
Faraday’s law of induction:
solenoid coil is displaced longitudinally
If a current is switched on or off in the
with respect to the coil
solenoid coil, a current is induced in the coil.
Motion of a
Such as induction is also observed when the
conductor
current in the solenoid coil is increased or Direction of
decreased. Current is induced in the coil when it the magnetic
is moved aside from front of the solenoid. From field
these experiments it is understood that whenever
the number of magnetic lines of force passing Direction of the
through the coil changes, current is induced in induced current
the coil. This is known as Faraday’s law of
induction. The current produced in the coil is
Motion of a conductor
called the induced current.
Fleming’s right hand rule :
When will the induced current in the electrical
conductor (coil) be maximum? It will be maximum
when the direction of motion of the electric
Direction
conductor is perpendicular to the magnetic field.
Direction of
of the
In order to show the direction of the induced
the induced
magnetic
current, Fleming’s right hand rule is very useful.
current
field
Stretch the thumb, the index finger and the middle
4.17 Fleming’s right hand rule
finger in such a way that they will be perpendicular
to each other. In this position, the thumb indicates the direction of motion of the conductor,
the index finger the direction of the magnetic field, and the middle finger shows the direction
of the induced current. This rule is known as Fleming’s right hand rule (fig 4.17).
Introduction to Scientist
		 Michael Faraday (1791-1867) was an experimental
scientist. He was not formally educated. Teenager Michael
started working in a bookbinding shop. While reading books
there, he got interested in science. Sir Humphrey Davy appointed
him as a laboratory assistant in the Royal Institute London. There
he discovered the laws of electromagnetic induction and the laws
of electrolysis. Several Universities offered him honorary degree,
but Faraday refused to accept such honours.

58

Alternating current (AC) and Direct Current (DC)
So far we have learnt about a non
oscillatory current flowing in one direction,
in a circuit, from the cell to the cell. Such a
current is called a direct current (DC) as
against a current changing in magnitude
and direction after equal intervals of time
which is called alternating current (AC).

Current Ampere

Direct current(DC)
Alternating current (AC)

time (s)

ing

uc
dc

Current Ampere
inc
re
as
ing
dc

stable dc

red

The direct current can increase, can be
stable, or can reduce also, but it is not
oscillatory. This is shown graphically in
the figure. Alternating current is oscillatory.
As shown in the graph (fig 4.19), it increases
to a maximum, then reduces to zero and
increases to maximum in the other direction
and again reduced to zero. (in the figure,
magnitudes like -1, -2 have been used to
show the reverse direction). The oscillation
of the alternating current occurs in a
sinusoidal manner with time and hence is
shown by the symbol ~. Direct current
flows in one direction, but the alternating
current flows in periodic manner, in one
cycle, in forward and reverse directions.

4.18 AC current and DC current

time (s)

4.19 Alternating current and
Direct current (Graphical)
In India, in the power stations generating electricity, one cycle changes in 1 second
50

i.e. the frequency of AC is 50 Hz (50 cycles per second). When the electric power is
transmitted over a long distance, it is beneficial to have it in AC form as it results into
minimum power loss during transmission. The home supply is of alternating current (AC).
We have learnt in the previous class about the precautions to be taken while using the
electricity.
Electric Generator
We have seen the experiments based on electromagnetic induction. The current produced
in these experiments was of very small magnitude. But the same principle can be harnessed
for the use of mankind to produce large current. Here, mechanical energy is used to rotate
the current carrying coil in a magnetic field, around an axle, thereby producing electricity.
Fig 4.20 shows a copper wire coil ABCD, kept between the two pole pieces of a magnet.
The two ends of the coil are connected to the conducting rings R1 and R2 via carbon brushes.
Both the rings are fixed to the axle, but there is a resistive coating in between the ring and
the axle. The axle is rotated with the help of a machine from outside. Because of this, the
coil ABCD starts rotating. The stationary carbon brushes B1 and B2 are connected to a
galvanometer, which shows the direction of current in the circuit. Upon rotating the axle, the
branch AB goes up and the branch CD goes down (i.e. the coil ABCD rotates clockwise).

59

According to Fleming’s right hand rule,
Magnetic field
electric current is produced in the branches
Coil
AB and CD in the direction. A
B and
C D. Thus, the current flows in the
direction A
B
C
D (as shown by
arrows in the figure). In the external circuit,
Carbon
the current flows from B2 to B1 through the
Conducting
brushes
ring
galvanometer. If instead of one loop coil, a
coil consisting of several turns is used, the
current of magnitude several times flows.
Axle
After half rotation, the branch AB takes the
place of branch CD and the branch CD takes
the position of the branch AB. Therefore, the
4.20 Electric generator
C
B
A.
induced current goes as D
But, the branch BA is always in contact with the brush B1 and branch DC in the contact
with B2. Hence, in the external circuit current flows from B1 to B2 i.e. opposite to the
previous half rotation. This repeats after every half rotation and alternating current is
produced. This is what is called an AC generator .
What will be required to make a DC generator? The DC does not change the direction
in the external circuit. To achieve this, a split ring is fixed on the axle like a split ring used
in electric motor. Because of this arrangement, the branch of the coil going upwards is
always in contact with one brush and the branch going downwards is always in contact
with the other brush. Hence, the current flows in one direction in the external circuit. This
is why this generator is called as a DC generator.

Use your brain power !

Draw the diagram of a DC generator. Then explain as
to how the DC current is obtained .

Exercise
1.		Tell the odd one out. Give proper
c. Generation of a current in a coil due
explanation.
to relative motion between the coil
a. Fuse wire, bad conductor, rubber 		
and the magnet.
		 gloves, generator.
d. Motion of the coil around the axle in
b. Voltmeter, Ammeter, galvanometer,
an electric motor.
thermometer.
4. Explain the difference :
c. Loud speaker, microphone, electric
AC generator and DC generator.
motor, magnet.
5. Which device is used to produce
2. Explain the construction and working
electricity? Describe with a neat
of the following. Draw a neat diagram
diagram.
and label it.
a. Electric motor
a. Electric motor
b. Galvanometer
b. Electric Generator(AC)
c. Electric Generator (DC)
3. Electromagnetic induction meansd. Voltmeter
a. Charging of an electric conductor.
6. How does the short circuit form?
b. Production of magnetic field due to a
What is its effect?
current flowing through a coil.

60

7.

Give Scientific reasons.
a. Tungsten metal is used to make a
solenoid type coil in an electric bulb.
b. In the electric equipment producing
heat e.g. iron, electric heater, boiler,
toaster etc. an alloy such as Nichrome
is used, not pure metals.
c. For electric power transmission, copper
or aluminium wire is used.
d. In practice the unit kWh is used for the
measurement of electrical energy,
rather than joule.
8. Which of the statement given below
correctly describes the magnetic field
near a long, straight current carrying
conductor?
a. The magnetic lines of force are in a
plane, perpendicular to the conductor
in the form of straight lines.
b. The magnetic lines of force are parallel
to the conductor on all the sides of
conductor.
c. The magnetic lines of force are
perpendicular to the conductor going
radially outward.
d. The magnetic lines of force are in
concentric circles with the wire as the
center, in a plane perpendicular to the
conductor.
9. What is a solenoid? Compare the
magnetic field produced by a solenoid
with the magnetic field of a bar
magnet. Draw neat figures and name
various components.
10. Name the following diagrams and
explain the concept behind them.

a.

c.

12. Solve the following example.
a. Heat energy is being produced in a
resistance in a circuit at the rate of
100 W. The current of 3 A is flowing
in the circuit. What must be the
value of the resistance?(Ans : 11 W)
b. Two tungsten bulbs of wattage
100 W and 60 W power work on
220 V potential difference. If they
are connected in parallel, how much
current will flow in the main conductor?
(Ans : 0.72A)
c. Who will spend more electrical
energy? 500 W TV Set in 30 mins,
or 600 W heater in 20 mins?
				(Ans : TV Set)
d. An electric iron of 1100 W is
operated for 2 hrs daily. What will
be the electrical consumption
expenses for that in the month of
April? (The electric company
charges Rs 5 per unit of energy).
(Ans : Rs 330)
Project
Under the guidance of your teachers,
make a ‘free-energy generator’. :

b.

²²²

11. Identify the figures and explain their 		
use.

a.

b.

61

5. Heat
Ø Latent heat		
Ø Anomalous behaviour of water
Ø Specific heat capacity

Ø
Ø

Regelation
Dew point and humidity

1. What is the difference between heat and temperature?

Can you recall? 2. What are the different ways of heat transfer?

In the previous standard, we have learnt about heat and different types of heat transfer.
We have also performed few experiments related to expansion and contraction of solids,
liquids and gases. We have learnt about the difference between heat and temperature. We
have also seen how temperature is measured using a thermometer.
Concepts like latent heat of phase transformation, anomalous behaviour of water,
dew point, humidity, specific heat capacity etc. are related to certain phenomena experienced by us in our day-to-day life. Let us learn more about these concepts.
Latent heat
Try this
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Take a few pieces of ice in a glass beaker.
As shown in figure 5.1.
Insert the bulb of a thermometer in ice and
measure its temperature.
Put the beaker on a stand and heat the ice
using a burner.
Record the temperature using the
thermometer after every minute.
As the ice is heated, it starts melting. Stir
the mixture of ice and water.
Continue the heating even after ice starts
melting.
Draw a graph of temperature versus time.

Thermometer

Ice cubes/pieces
Burner
Stand

5.1 Latent heat

You will observe that the temperature of the mixture remains 0 0C till the ice melts
completely. If we continue heating, even after conversion of all the ice into water, the
temperature of water starts rising and reaches 100 0C. At this temperature water starts
converting into steam. The temperature of water remains constant at 100 0C till all water
converts into steam. The graph of temperature versus time is shown in figure 5.2.
In this graph, line AB represents conversion of ice into water at constant temperature.
When ice is heated it melts at 0 0C and converts into water at this constant temperature.
The ice absorbs heat energy during this transition and the absorption of energy continues
till all the ice converts into water.

62

id

qu

Li

W
a te

r

The temperature remains constant
Boiling water + Vapour
during this transition. This constant
temperature, at which the ice converts into 0
Liquid - Gaseous state
C
water is called the melting point of ice.
Thus, during transition of solid phase to
liquid, the object absorbs heat energy, but its
temperature does not increase. This heat
energy is utilised for weakening the bonds
between the atoms or molecules in the solid
Time (Minutes)
and transform it into liquid phase. The heat
Ice+ Water
energy absorbed at constant temperature (Solid+liquid)
during transformation of solid into liquid is
5.2 Temperature vs Time Graph
called the latent heat of fusion.
The amount of heat energy absorbed at constant temperature by unit mass of a
solid to convert into liquid phase is called the specific latent heat of fusion.
Once all the ice is transformed into water, the temperature of water starts rising. It
increases up to 100 0C. Line BC in the graph represents rise in temperature of water from
0 0C to 100 0C. Thereafter, even though heat energy is supplied to water, its temperature
does not rise. The heat energy is absorbed by water at this temperature and used to break
the bonds between molecules of the liquid and convert the liquid into gaseous state. Thus,
during transformation from liquid phase to gas phase, heat energy is absorbed by the
liquid, but its temperature does not change. The constant temperature at which the liquid
transforms into gaseous state is called the boiling point of the liquid. The heat energy
absorbed at constant temperature during transformation of liquid into gas is called the
latent heat of vapourization.
The amount of heat energy absorbed at constant temperature by unit mass of a
liquid to convert into gaseous phase is called the specific latent heat of vapourization.
Different substances have different melting points and boiling points. The values of
melting point, boiling point and latent heat depend on atmospheric pressure.
Substance

Melting
point 0C

Boiling
point 0C

Water/ Ice
Copper
Ethyl alcohol
Gold
Silver
Lead

0
1083
-117
1063
962
327.5

100
2562
78
2700
2162
1749

Use your brain power !

Specific latent heat of
fusion
kJ/kg
cal/g

333
134
104
144
88.2
26.2

80
49
26
15.3
25
5.9

Specific latent heat of
vaporization
kJ/kg
cal/g

2256
5060
8540
1580
2330
859

540
1212
200
392
564
207

1. Is the concept of latent heat applicable during transformation of gaseous phase to liquid phase and from
liquid phase to solid phase?
2. Where does the latent heat go during these
transformations?

63

Regelation
You may have seen the preparation of an ice-ball. First, an ice slab is shredded and
then the shredded ice is pressurised around the tip of a stick to prepare the ice-ball. How
does the shredded ice convert into solid ice ball? If two small pieces of ice are taken and
pressed against each other for a while, they stick to each other. Why does this happen?
Try this

Take a small slab of ice, a thin wire, two identical weights.

Activity:
1. Put a slab of ice on a stand as shown in Figure 5.3.
2. Hang two equal weights to the two ends of a metal
wire and put the wire on the slab as shown in the
figure.
What do you observe?
It is observed that the wire gradually penetrates the ice
slab. After some time, the wire comes out of the lower
surface of the ice slab. However, the ice slab does not
break. The phenomenon in which the ice converts to
liquid due to applied pressure and then re-converts to
ice once the pressure is removed is called regelation.
		 The melting point of ice becomes lower than 0 0C
due to pressure. This means that at 0 0C, the ice gets
converted into water. As soon as the pressure is
removed, the melting point is restored to 0 0C and
water gets converted into ice again.

Ice

Weight

5.3 Regelation

1. In the above experiment, the wire moves through
the ice slab. However, the ice slab does not break.
Use your brain power !
Why?
2. Is there any relationship of latent heat with the regelation?
3. You know that as we go higher than the sea level, the boiling point of water decreases
What would be effect on the melting point of solid?

Can you tell?

We feel that some objects are cold, and some are hot. Is this
feeling related in some way to our body temperature?

Anomalous behaviour of water
In general, when a liquid is heated up to a certain temperature, it expands, and when
cooled it contracts. Water, however, shows a special and exceptional behaviour. If we
heat water from 0 0C up to 4 0C, it contracts instead of expanding. At 4 0C its volume is
minimum (due to contraction). If the water is heated further, it expands and its volume
increases. The behaviour of water between its temperature from 0 0C to 4 0C is called
anomalous behaviour of water.
If 1 kg of water is heated from 0 0C and its volume is plotted as a function of temperature,
we get the graph, shown in fig 5.4. At 4 0C, the volume of water is minimum. It means that
the density of water is maximum at 4 0C.

64

Specific Volume (cm3/g)

Study of anomalous behaviour
of water using Hope’s apparatus.
The anomalous behaviour of
water can be studied with Hope’s
apparatus. In Hope’s apparatus, a flat
bowl is attached to a cylindrical
container as shown in figure 5.5. There
is provision to attach thermometers
above (to measure temperature T2)
and below (to measure temperature
T1) the flat bowl on the cylindrical
container. Water is filled in the
cylindrical container and a mixture of
Temperature oC
ice and salt (freezing mixture) is put in
5.4 Graph between the volume and temperature of water
the flat bowl.
During the study of anomalous behaviour of water using Hope’s apparatus, temperature
T1 and T2 are recorded after every 30 seconds.
The temperatures are plotted on the Y-axis and the time in minutes on the X-axis. The
graph is shown in figure 5.6. The graph shows that initially, both the temperatures T1 and T2
are identical. However, as time passes, temperature T1 of water in the lower part of the
cylinder decreases fast, while, temperature T2 of water in the upper part of the cylinder
decreases comparatively slowly.
However, once the temperature T1 of the lower part reaches 4 0C, it remains almost stable
at that temperature. T2 decreases slowly to 4 0C. Thereafter, since T2 starts changing rapidly,
it records 0 0C first and after that the lower thermometer T1 records 0 0C temperature. The
point of intersection of the two curves shows the temperature of maximum density.
How can we explain these
observations? Initially, the temperature of
water in the middle of cylinder lowers due
to freezing mixture in the outer bowl. Since
the temperature of water there decreases,
its volume decreases, and its density
increases. The water with higher density
moves downwards. Therefore, the lower
thermometer T1 shows rapid fall in
temperature and this continues till the
temperature of water becomes equal to 4
0
C. When the temperature of water starts
decreasing below 4 0C, its volume increases,
and density decreases. It, therefore, moves
in the upward direction. The temperature
of water in upper part (T2), therefore,
decreases rapidly to 0 0C. The temperature
of water in the lower part (T1), however,
remains at 4 0C for some time and then
decreases slowly to 0 0C.

Freezing
mixture

Thermometer
T2

0 0C

Freezing
mixture
Thermometer
4 C T1
0

5.5 Hope’s Apparatus

65

Ice Layer

Temperature 0C

T2
T1

5

10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)

30

35 40

45

5.6 Time - Temperature Graph

5.7 Aquatic animals in cold regions

How will you explain following statements with
the help of the anomalous behaviour of water?
1. In regions with cold climate, the aquatic plants and animals can survive even when the
atmospheric temperature goes below 0 0C (See figure 5.7).
2. In cold regions in winter the pipes for water supply break and even rocks crack.
Dew point and Humidity
About 71% surface of the Earth is covered with water. Due to constant evaporation of
water, water vapour is always present in the atmosphere. The amount of water vapour in
the atmosphere helps us to understand the state of daily weather. The presence of water
vapour in the air makes it moist. The moisture in the atmosphere is called humidity.
For a given volume of air, at a specific temperature, there is a limit on how much
water vapour the air can contain. If the amount exceeds this limit, the excess vapour
converts into water droplets. When the air contains maximum possible water vapour, it is
said to be saturated with vapour at that temperature. The amount of vapour needed to
saturate the air depends on temperature of the air. If air temperature is low, it will need less
vapour to saturate the air. For example, if temperature of air is 40 0C, it can contain 49
grams of water vapour per kilogram of dry air without condensation. If the amount of
vapour exceeds this limit, the additional vapour will condense. However, if the temperature
of air is 20 0C, it can contain only 14.7 grams of water vapour per kilogram of dry air
without condensing. If the vapour contained in air is less that the maximum limit, then the
air is said to be unsaturated.
Suppose unsaturated air at a certain temperature is taken and its temperature is
decreased, a temperature is reached at which the air becomes saturated with vapour.
This temperature is called the dew point temperature.
The vapour content in the air is measured using a physical quantity called absolute
humidity. The mass of vapour present in a unit volume of air is called absolute humidity.
Generally absolute humidity is measured in kg/m3.
The feeling of humid or dry nature of air not only depends on the amount of vapour in
the air, but it also depends on how close that amount is for making the air saturated with
vapour. It means that it depends on temperature of the air also.
The ratio of actual mass of vapour content in the air for a given volume and temperature
to that required to make the air saturated with vapour at that temperature is called the
relative humidity.
actual mass of water vapour content in the air in a given volume
x 100
% Relative humidity =
mass of vapour needed to make the air saturated in that volume

Use your brain power !

66

The relative humidity at the dew point is 100%. If the relative humidity is more than
60% we feel that the air is humid. If the relative humidity is less than 60%, we feel that the
air is dry.
During winter season, you may have observed a white trail at the back of a flying
plane in a clear sky. As the plane flies, the vapour released by the aeroplane engine
condenses and forms clouds. If the surrounding air is having more relative humidity, it
takes a long time for the white trail, formed by condensation of the vapour, to disappear.
If relative humidity of the surrounding air is less, either the size of the white trail may be
small or it may not even get formed.
1. Take a bottle of cold water out of a refrigerator and keep it
outside for a while. Observe the outer surface of the bottle.
2. Drops of water can be observed on the outer surface of bottle. In
the same way, if we observe the leaves of plants/grass or
window-glass of a vehicle in the early morning we see water
droplets collected on the surface.
Through these two observations, we sense the presence of water vapour in the
atmosphere. When air cools, due to decrease in temperature it becomes saturated with
water vapour. As a result, the excess water vapour gets converted into tiny droplets. The
dew-point temperature is decided by the amount of vapour in the air.
Try this.

Unit of heat
The units of heat are Joule (J) in SI units, cal (calorie) in cgs units.
The amount of heat necessary to raise temperature of 1 g of water by 1 0C from
14.5 0C to 15.5 0C is called one cal heat.
Similarly, the amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature of 1 kg of water by
1 0C from 14.5 0C to 15.5 0C is called one kcal heat.
It is clear that (1 kcal= 1000 cal).

Always remember
If we heat 1 kg of water by 10C in different temperature range than 14.5 0C to
15.5 0C, the amount of heat required will be slightly different. It is, therefore, essential
to define a specific temperature range while defining the unit of heat. Calorie and Joule
are related by following relation: 1 cal = 4.18 Joule

Introduction to Scientist
James Prescott Joule (1818-1889) : He was the first person to
show that the kinetic energy of tiny particles of matter appears as
heat energy and also that energy can be converted from one form
to another. Conversion of heat energy to work gives the first law of
thermodynamics. The unit of heat is called Joule (J) after him.

67

Specific Heat Capacity

Try this.

Material : A tray with thick layer of wax, solid spheres of iron,
lead and copper of equal mass, burner or spirit lamp, large beaker.

Procedure :
1. Take three spheres of iron, copper and
lead of equal mass (Fig. 5.8)
2. Put all the three spheres in boiling water
in the beaker for some time.
3. Take the three spheres out of the water.
All the spheres will be at temperature 100
0
C. Put them immediately on the thick slab
of wax.
4. Note, the depth that each of the sphere
goes into the wax.

Wax layer

Lead
Copper
Iron
5.8 Specific heat capacity of metals

The sphere which absorbs more heat from the water will give more heat to wax. More
wax will thus melt and the sphere will go deeper in the wax. It can be observed that the
iron sphere goes deepest into the wax. Lead sphere goes the least and copper sphere goes
to intermediate depth. This shows that for equal rise in temperature, the three spheres have
absorbed different amounts of heat. This means that the property which determines the
amount of heat absorbed by a sphere is different for the three spheres. This property is
called the specific heat capacity.
The amount of heat energy required to raise the temperature of a unit mass of an
object by 1 0C is called the specific heat of that object.
The specific heat capacity is denoted by letter ‘c’. The SI unit of specific heat is J/ 0C
kg, and the CGS unit is cal/g 0C.
Specific heat
Specific heat
S. No.
Substance
S. No.
Substance
0
(cal/g C )
(cal/g 0C )
1.
Water
1.0
5.
Iron
0.110
2.
Paraffin
0.54
6.
Copper
0.095
3.
Kerosene
0.52
7.
Silver
0.056
4.
Aluminium
0.215
8.
Mercury
0.033
5.9 Specific heat capacity of some substances

If specific heat of an object is ‘c’, the mass of the object is ‘m’ and if the temperature
of the object is raised by ∆T 0C, the heat energy absorbed by the object is given by,
					m ´ c ´ ∆T.
In the same way if specific heat of an object is ‘c’, the mass of the object is ‘m’ and if
the temperature of the object is decreased by ∆T 0C, then the heat energy lost by the object
will be,
					 m ´ c ´ ∆T.

68

Heat Exchange If heat is exchanged between a hot
and cold object, the temperature of the cold object goes
on increasing due to gain of energy and the temperature
Hot Cold
of the hot object goes on decreasing due to loss of
object
object
energy. The change in temperature continues till the
temperatures of both the objects attain the same value.
In this process, the cold object gains heat energy and
the hot object loses heat energy. If the system of both
the objects is isolated from the environment by keeping
5.10 Box of heat resistant
it inside a heat resistant box (meaning that the energy
material
exchange takes place between the two objects only),
then no energy can flow from inside the box or come into the box (fig 5.10). In this situation,
we get the following principle
Heat energy lost by the hot object = Heat energy gained by the cold object. This is called
as ‘Principle of heat exchange’
Measurement of specific heat: (mixing method) and calorimeter
The specific heat of an object can be measured using mixing method. For this calorimeter
is used. You have learnt about calorimeter in the previous standard. If a hot solid object is
put in the water in a calorimeter, heat exchange between the hot object and the water and
calorimeter starts. This continues till the temperatures of the solid object, water and the
calorimeter become equal. Therefore,
Heat lost by solid object = heat gained by water in calorimeter + heat gained by the calorimeter.
Here, heat lost by the solid object (Q) = mass of the solid object ´ its specific heat ´ decrease in
its temperature.
Similarly,
Heat gained by the water (Q1)= mass of the water ´ its specific heat ´ increase in its temperature
Heat gained by the calorimeter (Q2)= mass of the calorimeter ´ its specific heat ´ increase in its
temperature.
Heat lost by hot object = Heat gained by calorimeter + Heat gained by water.
Q = Q2+ Q1
Using these equations, if the specific heat of water and the calorimeter are known, the
specific heat of the solid object can be calculated.
ICT :

Prepare a presentation using videos, pictures, audios, graphs etc. to explain
various concepts in this chapter. Collect all such material from the Internet, using
Information Technology. Under the guidance of your teachers, arrange a competition of
such presentations in your class.
Solved Examples
Example 1: How much heat energy is necessary to raise the temperature of 5 kg of water
from 20 0C to 100 0C.
Given: m= 5 kg, c = 1 kcal/kg 0C and change in temperature ∆T = 100-20 = 80 0C
		 Energy to be supplied to water = energy gained by water
		 = mass of water ´ specific heat of water ´ change in temperature of water
		 = m ´ c ´ ∆T
		 = 5 ´ 80 0C
		 = 400 kcal
Hence, the heat energy necessary to raise the temperature of water = 400 kcal.

69

Example 2: A copper sphere of 100 g mass is heated to raise its temperature to 100 0C and
is released in water of mass 195 g and temperature 20 0C in a copper calorimeter. If the
mass of calorimeter is 50 g, what will be the maximum temperature of water?
Given: Specific heat of copper = 0.1 cal/g 0C
		 And so specific heat of calorimeter= 0.1 cal/ g 0C
		 Suppose the copper ball water and the calorimeter attain final temperature T.
		 Heat lost by solid object = heat gained by water in calorimeter + heat gained by the
calorimeter.
		 Here, heat lost by the copper ball = mass of the copper ´specific heat of copper
							 ´ decrease in temperature of the ball
		 Q = 100 ´ 0.1 ´ (100 - T)
Similarly,
		 Heat gained by the water = mass of the water X its specific heat X increase in its
temperature
and
Q1 = 195 ´ 1 ´ (T - 20)
Heat gained by the calorimeter = mass of the calorimeter ´ its specific heat ´ increase in
its temperature
Q2= 50 ´ 0.1 ´ (T - 20)
Q = Q 1 + Q2
100 ´ 0.1 ´ (100 - T) = 195 ´ 1 ´ (T - 20) + 50 ´ 0.1 ´ (T - 20)
10 (100 - T) = 195 (T - 20) + 5 (T - 20)
10 (100 - T) = 200 (T - 20)
210 T = 5000
T = 23.8 0C
\The maximum temperature of water will be 23.8 0C.
Example 3: If 80 g steam of temperature 97 0C is released on an ice slab of temperature
0 0C, how much ice will melt? How much energy will be transferred to the ice when the
steam will be transformed to water?
Given: Latent heat of melting the ice = Lmelt= 80 cal/g
		 Latent heat of vaporization of water = Lvap. = 540 cal/g
mass of steam = msteam= 80 g
Solution:
			
Temperature of steam = 97 0C
			
Temperature of ice = Tice= 0 0C
		 Heat released during conversion of steam of temperature 97 0C into water of
		 temperature 97 0C = msteam ´ Lvap.
= 80 X 540 --------------------------- (1)
			
		 Heat released during conversion of water of 97 0C into water at 0 0C
			
= msteam ´ ∆T ´ c
			
= 80 ´ (97 - 0) ´ 1 = 80 ´ 97 -------------- (2)
		 Total heat gained by the ice 80 ´ 540 + 80 ´ 97 from equations (1) and (2)
			
= 80 (540 + 97)
			
= 80 ´ 637 = 50960 cal.

70

Some mass, of the ice, mice will melt due to this heat gained by the ice, then,
		mice X Lmelt = 50960 cal
		mice X 80 = 50960
		mice = 637 g
Thus, 637 g ice will melt and 50960 cal kcal will be given to the ice.
Books are My Friends : Read for more information
1. A Textbook of heat - J.B. Rajam
		
2. Heat - V.N Kelkar
3. A Treatise on Heat - Saha and Srivastava

Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks and rewrite the
sentence.

3.		
What is meant by specific heat
capacity? How will you prove
experimentally
that
different
substances have different specific
heat capacities?

a. The amount of water vapour in air is
determined in terms of its …………
b. If objects of equal masses are given
equal heat, their final temperature will
be different. This is due to difference
in their ……………...

4. While deciding the unit for heat,
which temperatures interval is
chosen? Why?
5. Explain the following temperature
versus time graph.

c. During transformation of liquid phase
to solid phase, the latent heat is
………….

Boiling water + Vapour

Liquid - Gaseous state

C

0

id
qu
Li

W

ate

r

2. Observe the following graph.
Considering the change in volume of
water as its temperature is raised
from 0 oC, discuss the difference in
the behaviour of water and other
substances. What is this behaviour
of water called?

Time (Minutes)
Ice+ Water
(Solid+liquid)

1 kgVolume of water

6. Explain the following:
a. What is the role of anomalous
behaviour of water in preserving
aquatic life in regions of cold
climate?
b. How can you relate the formation of
water droplets on the outer surface
of a bottle taken out of refrigerator
with formation of dew?
c. In cold regions in winter, the rocks
crack due to anomalous expansion
of water.

Temperature 0C

71

b. Liquid ammonia is used in ice factory
for making ice from water. If water
at 20 0C is to be converted into 2 kg
ice at 0 0C, how many grams of
ammonia are to be evaporated?
(Given: The latent heat of
vaporization of ammonia= 341 cal/g)
				
Answer : 586.4 g
c. A thermally insulated pot has 150 g
ice at temperature 0 0C. How much
steam of 100 0C has to be mixed to it,
so that water of temperature 50 0C
will be obtained?
(Given : latent heat of
			
melting of ice = 80 cal/g,
latent heat of
		 vaporization of water = 540 cal/g,
specific heat of water = 1 cal/g 0C)
				
Answer : 33 g
d. A calorimeter has mass 100 g and
specific heat 0.1 kcal/ kg 0C. It
contains 250 gm of liquid at 30 0C
having specific heat of 0.4 kcal/kg
0
C. If we drop a piece of ice of mass
10 g at 0 0C, What will be the
temperature of the mixture?
Answer : 20.8 oC
Project
Take help of your teachers to make a
working model of Hope’s apparatus
and perform the experiment. Verify
the results you obtain.

7. Answer the following:
a. What is meant by latent heat? How
will the state of matter transform if
latent heat is given off?
b Which principle is used to measure
the specific heat capacity of a
substance?
c. Explain the role of latent heat in the
change of state of a substances?
d. On what basis and how will you
determine whether air is saturated
with vapour or not?
8. Read the following paragraph and
answer the questions.
If heat is exchanged between a hot and
cold object, the temperature of the cold
object goes on increasing due to gain of
energy and the temperature of the hot
object goes on decreasing due to loss of
energy.
The change in temperature continues
till the temperatures of both the objects
attain the same value. In this process, the
cold object gains heat energy and the hot
object loses heat energy. If the system of
both the objects is isolated from the
environment by keeping it inside a heat
resistant box (meaning that the energy
exchange takes place between the two
objects only), then no energy can flow from
inside the box or come into the box.
i. Heat is transferred from where to 		
where?
ii. Which principle do we learn about
from this process?
iii. How will you state the principle
briefly?
iv. Which property of the substance is
measured using this principle?

²²²

9. Solve the following problems:
a. Equal heat is given to two objects A
and B of mass 1 g. Temperature of A
increases by 3 0C and B by 5 0C. 		
Which object has more specific heat?
And by what factor?
			
Answer : A, 5
3

72

6. Refraction of light
Ø Refraction of light
Ø Refractive index		

Can you recall?

Ø Laws of refraction
Ø Dispersion of light

1. What is meant by reflection of light?
2. What are the laws of reflection?

We have seen that, generally light travels in a straight line. Because of this, if an
opaque object lies in its path, a shadow of the object is formed. We have also seen in
previous classes how these shadows change due to the change in relative positions of the
source of light and the object. But light can bend under some special circumstances as we
will see below
Refraction of light
Try this.

Material: Glass, 5 rupee coin, Pencil, metallic vessel etc.
Activity 2:
1. keep a 5 rupee coin in a metallic vessel.

Activity 1:
1. Take a transparent glass and fill it with
water.
2. Dip some portion of a pencil vertically
in water and observe the thickness of
the portion of the pencil, in water.
3. Now keep the pencil inclined to water
surface and observe its thickness.

2. Slowly go away from the vessel
3. Stop at the place when the coin 		
disappears.
4. Keep looking in the direction of the coin.
5. Ask a friend to slowly fill water in the
vessel. You will be able to see the coin
once the level of water reaches a
certain height. Why does it happen?

In both cases, the portion of the pencil
inside water appears to be thicker than the
portion above water. In the second case,
the pencil appears to be broken near the
surface of water. Why does it happen?

In both the above activities the observed effects are created due to the change in
the direction of light while coming out of water. Light changes its direction when going
from one transparent medium to another transparent medium. This is called the
refraction of light.
Activity 3:
1. Keep a glass slab on a blank paper and draw its outline PQRS as shown in figure 6.1.
2. Draw an inclined straight line on the side of PQ so that it intersects PQ at N. Pierce two
pins vertically at two points A and B along the line.
3. Look at the pins A and B from the opposite side of the slab and pierce pins C and D
vertically so that the images of A and B are in line with C and D.
4. Now remove the chip and the pins and draw a straight line going through points C and
D so that it intersects SR at M.
5. Join points M and N. Observe the incident ray AN and emergent ray MD.

73

The first refraction occurs when light ray
enters the glass from air at N on the side PQ. The
second refraction occurs when light enters air
through glass at point M on the side SR. For the
first refraction the angle of incidence is i while
for the second it is i1. The angle of refraction at N
is r.
Note that i1 = r. In the second refraction, the
angle of refraction is e which is equal to i. On
both parallel sides PQ and RS of the glass slab,
the change in direction of light ray is equal but in
opposite directions.
Thus, the light ray MD emerging from the
glass slab is parallel to the incident ray AN on
the side PQ of the slab. But the emergent ray is
somewhat displaced with respect to the incident
ray.

Use your brain power !

A
B

Air

i

Q

N

P
r

Glass

Refraction
of light

i1

S

M

e

C

R
Air
D

6.1 Refraction of light passing
through a glass slab

1. Will light travel through a glass slab with the same
velocity as it travels in air?
2. Will the velocity of light be same in all media?

Laws of refraction
Let us study the light ray entering a glass
slab from air as shown in the figure 6.2. Here AN
is the incident ray and NB is the refracted ray.
1. Incident ray and refracted ray at the point of
incidence N are on the opposite sides of the
normal to the surface of the slab at that point
i.e. CD, and the three, incident ray, refracted
ray and the normal, are in the same plane.
2. For a given pair of media, here air and glass,
the ratio of sin i to sin r is a constant. Here, i
is the angle of incidence and r is the angle of
refraction.
Refractive index
The change in the direction of a light ray
while entering different media is different. It is
related to the refractive index of the medium.
The value of the refractive index is different for
different media and also for light of different
colours for the same medium. The refractive
indices of some substances with respect to
vacuum are given in the table. The refractive
index of a medium with respect to vacuum is
called its absolute refractive index.
Refractive index depends on the velocity
of light in the medium.

74

A
Air

Incident ray
C
i

N

Dr

Glass

Refracted B
ray
6.2 Light ray entering a glass slab from air

sin i
sin r = constant = n
n is called the refractive index
of the second medium with respect
to the first medium. This second law
is also called Snell’s law. A ray
incident along the normal (i = 0)
goes forward in the same direction
(r = 0).

Substance

Refractive
index

Substance

Refractive
index

Substance

Refractive
index

Air

1.0003

Fused Quartz

1.46

Carbon
disulphide

1.63

Ice

1.31

Turpentine oil

1.47

Dense flint glass

1.66

Water

1.33

Benzene

1.50

Ruby

1.76

Alcohol

1.36

Crown glass

1.52

Sapphire

1.76

Kerosene

1.39

Rock salt

1.54

Diamond

2.42

Absolute refractive indices of some media

Let the velocity of light in medium 1 be v1 and in
medium 2 be v2 as shown in figure 6.3. The refractive
index of the second medium with respect to the first
medium, 1n2 is equal to the ratio of the velocity of light
in medium 1 to that in medium 2.
Velocity of light in medium 1 (v1)
Refractive index 1n2 =
Velocity of light in medium 2 (v2)
Similarly, the refractive index of medium 1
with respect to medium 2 is

n1 =

2

v2
v1

Ray
Medium 1
Air

v1

Medium 2
Glass
v2

6.3 Light ray going from
medium 1 to medium 2

If the first medium is vacuum then the refractive index of medium 2
is called absolute refractive index and it is written as n.

Can you tell?

If the refractive index of second medium with respect to first
medium is 1n2and that of third medium with respect to second
medium is 2n3 , what and how much is 1n3 ?

Rarer medium

i

Rarer medium
Denser medium

r

i

Denser medium

Denser medium

Rarer medium r
6.4 Refraction of light in different media

When a light ray
passes from a rarer
medium to a denser a
medium, it bends towards
the normal.

When a light ray
passes from a denser
medium to
a rarer
medium, it bends away
from the normal.

75

When a light ray is incident
normally at the boundary
between two media, it does not
change its direction and hence
does not get refracted.

Twinkling of stars
1. Have you seen a mirage which is an illusion of the appearance
of water on a hot road or in a desert?
Can you tell?
2. Have you seen that objects beyond and above a holi fire appear
to be shaking? Why does this happen?
Local atmospheric conditions affect the refraction of light to some extent. In both the
examples above, the air near the hot road or desert surface and near the holi flames is hot
and hence rarer than the air above it. The refractive index of air keeps increasing as we
go to increasing heights. In the first case above, the direction of light rays, coming from a
distance, keeps changing according to the laws of refraction.
The light rays coming from a
distant object appear to be coming
from the image of the object inside
the ground as shown in figure 6.5.
This is called a mirage.
In the second example, the
direction of light rays coming from
objects beyond the holi fire changes
due to changing refractive index
above the fire. Thus, the objects
appear to be moving.

Cold air
Hot air

Hot surface
6.5 Mirage

Effect of atmospheric conditions on refraction of light can be seen in the twinkling of
the stars.
Stars are self-luminous and can be seen at night in the absence of sunlight. They
appear to be point sources because of their being at a very large distance from us. As the
desity of air increases with lowering height above the surface of the earth, the refractive
index also increases. Star light coming towards us travels from rarer medium to denser
medium and constantly bends towards the normal. This makes the star appear to be higher
in the sky as compared to its actual position as shown in the figure, 6.6.
Apparent position of a star
Atmospheric layers

Star
Apparent position
Horizon

increasing
refractive
index
Real position

Earth

6.7 Effect of atmospheric refraction

6.6 Apparent position of a star

The apparent position of the star keeps changing a bit. This is because of the motion
of atmospheric air and changing air density and temperature. Because of this, the refractive
index of air keeps changing continuously. Because of this change, the position and
brightness of the star keep changing continuously and the star appears to be twinkling.

76

We do not see twinkling of planets. This is because, planets are much closer to us as
compared to stars. They, therefore, do not appear as point sources but appear as a collection
of point sources. Because of changes in atmospheric refractive index the position as well
as the brightness of individual point source change but the average position and total
average brightness remains unchanged and planets do not twinkle.
By Sunrise we mean the appearance of the Sun above the horizon. But when the Sun
is somewhat below the horizon, its light rays are able to reach us along a curved path due
to their refraction through earth’s atmosphere as shown in the figure 6.7. Thus, we see the
Sun even before it emerges above the horizon. Same thing happens at the time of Sunset
and we keep seeing the Sun for a short while even after it goes below the horizon.
Dispersion of light
Hold the plastic scale in your compass in front of your eyes and see through it while
turning it slowly. You will see light rays divided into different colours. These colours appear
in the following order: violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red. You know that
light is electromagnetic radiation. Wavelength is an important property of radiation. The
wavelength of radiation to which our eyes are sensitive is between 400 and 700 nm. In this
interval, radiation of different wavelengths appears to have different colours mentioned
above. The red light has maximum wavelength i.e. close to 700 nm while violet light has
the smallest wavelength, close to 400 nm. Remember that 1 nm = 10-9 m.
In vacuum, the velocity of light rays of all frequencies is the same. But the velocity of
light in a medium depends on the frequency of light and thus different colours travel with
different velocity. Therefore, the refractive index of a medium is different for different
colours. Thus, even when white light enters a single medium like glass, the angles of
refraction are different for different colours. So when the white light coming from the Sun
through air, enters any refracting medium, it emerges as a spectrum of seven colours.
The process of separation of light into its component colours while passing
through a medium is called the dispersion of light.
Sir Isaac Newton was the first person to
use a glass prism to obtain Sun’s spectrum.
When white light is incident on the prism,
different colours bend through different angles.
Among the seven colours, red bends the least
while violet bends the most. Thus, as shown in
figure 6.8, the seven colours emerge along
different paths and get separated and we get a
spectrum of seven colours.

Use your brain power !

ght

li
Sun

Glass Prism

6.8 Dispersion of light

R
O
Y
G
B
I
V

1. From incident white light how will you obtain white
emergent light by making use of two prisms?

2. You must have seen chandeliers having glass prisms. The light from a tungsten bulb
gets dispersed while passing through these prisms and we see coloured spectrum. If we
use an LED light instead of a tungsten bulb, will we be able to see the same effect?

77

Partial and total internal reflection
When light enters a rarer medium from a denser medium, it gets partially reflected i.e.
part of the light gets reflected and comes back into the denser medium as per laws of
reflection. This is called partial reflection. The rest of the light gets refracted and goes into
the rarer medium.
As light is going from
Refracted Rays
denser to rarer medium, it
Air
bends away from the
normal i.e. the angle of
r
r1
r=900
Medium 1
incidence i, is smaller
than the angle of
ic
Water
i1
refraction r. This is shown
i
i ic Total internal
on the left side of the
reflection
figure 6.9. If we increase
Partial reflection
Light
i, r will also increase
Medium 2
source
according to Snell’s law
as the refractive index is
6.9 Partial and total internal reflection
a constant.
For a particular value of i, the value of r becomes equal to 90o. This value of i is called
the critical angle. For angles of incidence larger than the critical angle, the angle of
refraction is larger than 90o. Such rays return to the denser medium as shown towards the
right in figure 6.9. Thus, all the light gets reflected back into the dense medium. This is
called total internal reflection. We can determine the value of the critical angle the as
follows.
n =

1 2

sin i
sin r

For total internal reflection,
i = critical angle, r = 900

		Rainbow is a beautiful natural
phenomenon. It is the combined effect of a
number of natural processes. It is the combined
effect of dispersion, refraction and total internal
reflection of light. It can be seen mainly after a
rainfall. Small droplets of water act as small
prisms. When light rays from the Sun enter
these droplets, it gets refracted and dispersed.
Then there is internal reflection as shown in
the figure, and after that once again the light
gets refracted while coming out of the droplet.
All these three processes together produce the
rainbow.

n =
1 2

( sin 900 = 1)

Light ray

Water droplet

Internal reflection

6.10 Rainbow production

Books are my friends
1. Why the Sky is Blue - Dr. C.V. Raman talks about science
			
: C. V. Raman and Chandralekha
2. Optics : Principles and Applications : K.K. Sharma
3. Theoretical concepts in Physics : M.S. Longair

78

sin i
= sin i
sin 900
∴

Some Fun
Try to see if you
can see dispersion of
light using plastic jar,
mirror and water.

Solved Examples
1. The absolute refractive index of water is
2. Light travels with a velocity 1.5 x 108
m/s in a medium. On entering second
1.36. What is the velocity of light in water?
8
medium its velocity becomes 0.75 x 108
(velocity of light in vacuum 3 x10 m/s)
m/s. What is the refractive index of the
Given:
8
second medium with respect to the first
V1 = 3x10 m/s
medium?
n = 1.36
Given:
V1
3 x108
n=
1.36 =
V1 = 1.5 x108 m/s, ,V2 = 0.75 x108 m/s
V
V
2

3x108
= 2.21x108 m/s
V2 =
1.36

2

n=?
2 1

n =
2 1

1.5 x 108
= 2
0.75 x 108

Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks and Explain the
completed sentences.

C. If the refractive index of glass with
respect to air is 3/2, what is the
refractive index of air with respect
to glass?
1
		
a.
b. 3
2
1
2
		
c. 3
d. 3
4. Solve the following examples.

a . Refractive index depends on the .............
of light.
b. The change in ................ of light rays
while going from one medium to another
is called refraction.
2. Prove the following statements.
a. If the angle of incidence and angle of
emergence of a light ray falling on a
glass slab are i and e respectively, prove
that, i = e.
b. A rainbow is the combined effect of the
refraction, dispersion, and total internal
reflection of light.

a. If the speed of light in a medium is
1.5 x 108 m/s, what is the absolute
refractive index of the medium?
		
Ans : 2
b. If the absolute refractive indices of
glass and water are 3/2 and 4/3
respectively, what is the refractive
index of glass with respect to water?
9
				
		
Ans :
8
Project :

3. Mark the correct answer in the
following questions.
A. What is the reason for the twinkling
of stars?
i . Explosions occurring in stars from
		 time to time
ii. Absorption of light in the earth’s
		 atmosphere
iii. Motion of stars
iv. Changing refractive index of the
atmospheric gases
B. We can see the Sun even when it is
little below the horizon because of
i. Reflection of light
ii. Refraction of light
iii. Dispersion of light
iv. Absorption of light

Using a laser and soap water, study the
refraction of light under the guidance
of your teacher.

²²²

79

7. Lenses
Ø Lenses		
Ø Ray diagram for refracted light
Ø Sign convention
Ø Working of human eye and lens
Ø Defects of vision and their correction
Ø Uses of lenses
Can you recall?

1. Indicate the following terms related to spherical mirrors in
figure 7.1: poles, centre of curvature, radius of curvature,
principal focus.
2. How are concave and convex mirrors constructed?

Lenses
You must have seen lenses used in day to
day life. Some examples are: the lenses used
by old persons for reading, lens embedded in
the front door of the house, the lens which the
watch maker attaches to his eye etc.
Lenses are used in spectacles. They are
also used in telescopes as you have learnt in
the previous standard.

7.1 Spherical mirror

A lens is a transparent medium bound by two surfaces. The lens which has two
spherical surfaces which are puffed up outwards is called a convex or double convex lens.
This lens is thicker near the centre as compared to the edges. The lens with both surfaces
spherical on the inside is called a concave or double concave lens. This lens is thinner at
the centre as compared to its edges.
Different types of lenses are
shown in figure 7.2. A ray of light
gets refracted twice while passing
through a lens, once while entering
the lens and once while emerging
from the lens. The direction of the
ray changes because of these
refractions. Both the surfaces of
most lenses are parts of a sphere.

BiconPositive
B i c o n - Plano
Convex Meniscus cave
vex

Negative
Plano
Concave Meniscus

7.2 Types of lenses
A

S1
R1

2

1
O

C1

a.

S1

S2

A B
R1

C2

1

O 2

C1

C2

R2
B

b.

S2

R2

D

C

7.3 Cross-sections of convex and concave lenses.

The cross-sections of convex and concave lenses are shown in parts a and b of figure
7.3. The surface marked as 1 is part of sphere S1 while surface 2 is part of sphere S2.

80

Centre of curvature (C) : The centres of spheres whose
P1
Q2
parts form surfaces of the lenses are called centres of
curvatures of the lenses. A lens with both surfaces
spherical, has two centres of curvature C1 and C2.
Q3
P3
O
Radius of curvature (R) : The radii (R1 and R2) of the
spheres whose parts form surfaces of the lenses are
called the radii of curvature of the lens.
Q1
P2
Principal axis : The imaginary line passing through
both centres of curvature is called the principal axis of
the lens.
P1
Q2
Optical centre (O) : The point inside a lens on the
principal axis, through which light rays pass without
changing their path is called the optical centre of a lens.
Q3
O
P3
In figure 7.4, rays P1Q1, P2Q2 passing through O are
going along a straight line. Thus O is the optical centre
of the lens.
Q1
P2
Principal focus (F) : When light rays parallel to the
principal axis are incident on a convex lens, they
converge to a point on the principal axis. This point is
7.4 Optical centre of a lens
called the principal focus of the lens. As shown in figure
7.5a F1 and F2 are the principal foci of the convex lens.
Light rays parallel to the principal axis falling on a convex lens come together i.e. get
focused at a point on the principal axis. So this type of lens is called a converging lens.
Rays travelling parallel to the principal axis of a concave lens diverge after refraction
in such a way that they appear to be coming out of a point on the principal axis. This point
is called the principal focus of the concave lens. As shown in figure 7.5b F1 and F2 are the
principal foci of the concave lens.
Light rays parallel to the principal axis falling on a concave lens go away from one
another (diverge) after refraction. So this type of lens is called a divergent lens.
Focal length (f) : The distance between the optical centre and principal focus of a lens is
called its focal length.

F1

F2

F1

F2

f
b.

a.

f

7. 5 Principal focus of a lens

Try this.

Material: Convex lens, screen, meter scale, stand for the lens etc.

Method:
Keeping the screen fixed, obtain a clear image of a distant object like a tree or a
building with the help of the lens on the screen. Measure the distance between the screen
and the lens with the help of the meter scale. Now turn the other side of the lens towards
the screen. Again obtain a clear image of the distant object on the screen by moving the
lens forward or backward. Measure the distance between the screen and the lens again.

81

What is this distance between the lens and the screen called? Discuss the relation
between this distance and the radius of curvature of the lens with your teacher. The image
of a distant object is obtained close to the focus of the lens, hence, the above distance is the
focal length of the lens. What will happen if you use a concave lens in this experiment?
Ray diagram for refraction : You have learnt the rules for drawing ray diagrams for
spherical mirrors. Similarly, one can obtain the images formed by lenses with the help of ray
diagrams. One can obtain the position, size and nature of the images with the help of these
diagrams.
Images formed by convex lenses
One can use following three rules to draw ray diagrams of images obtained by convex
lenses.
Incident ray

F1

Reflected ray

O

Reflected ray

O

F2

Incident ray

F2

F2
F1

O
Reflected ray

Rule 1: When the incident ray Rule 2: When the incident ray
is parallel to the principal axis, passes through the principal
the refracted ray passes focus, the refracted ray is
parallel to the principal axis.
through the principal focus.

Try This

Incident ray

F1

Rule 3: When the incident ray
passes through the optical
centre of the lens, it passes
without changing its direction.

Material: A convex lens, screen, meter scale, stand for the lens,
chalk, candle etc.

Method:
Screen
1. Draw a straight line along the centre of a
Convex lens
long table.
Candle
2. Place the lens on the stand at the central
point (O) of the line.
3. Place the screen on one side, of the lens.
Move it along the line so as to get a clear
image of a distant object. Mark its
F2
F1
O
2F1
2F2
position as F1.
4. Measure the distance between O and F1.
7. 6 Arrangement for the experiment
Mark a point at distance 2F1 from O on
the same side of F1 and mark it as 2F1.
5. Repeat actions 3 and 4 on the other side of the lens and mark F2 and 2F2 on the straight
line.
6. Now place the burning candle on the other side of lens far beyond 2F1. Place the screen
on the opposite side of the lens and obtain a clear image of the candle by moving it
forward or backward along the line. Note the position, size and nature of the image.
7. Repeat action 6 by placing the candle beyond 2F1, at 2F1, between 2F1 and F1, at F1 and
between F1 and O. Note your observations.

Can you recall?

What are real and virtual images? How will you find
out whether an image is real or virtual? Can a virtual
image be obtained on a screen?

82

As shown in the figure 7.7, an object
AB is placed beyond the point 2F1. The
incident ray BC, starting from B and going
parallel to the principal axis, goes through
the principal focus F2 after refraction along
CT. The ray BO, starting from B and
passing through the optical centre O of the
lens goes along OS without changing its
direction. It intersects CT in B¢. This means
that the image of B is formed at B¢.

B

C
F2

A 2F1

F1

Al

2F2

O
Bl

S
T

7.7 Real image formed by a convex lens

As A is situated on the principal axis, its image will also be located along the principal
axis at A¢, vertically above B¢. Thus, A¢B¢ will be the image of AB formed by the lens. So
we learn that if an object is placed beyond 2F1, the image is formed between F2 and 2F2.
It is real and inverted and its size is smaller than that of the object.

Observe
Study figure 7.8. Determine the
position, size and nature of images
formed for different positions of an
object with the help of ray diagrams.
Check your
conclusions and
observations in the previous activity
with those given in the table.
7.8 Images formed by position of an object

Images formed by convex lenses for different positions of the object.
S.
Position of the
Position of the
Size of the
Nature of the
No.
object
image
image
image
1 At infinity
Point image
Real and inverted
At focus F2
2

Beyond 2F1

Between F2 and 2F2 Smaller

Real and inverted

3

At 2F1

At 2F2

Same size

Real and inverted

4

Between F1 and 2F1

Beyond 2F2

Larger

Real and inverted

5

At focus F1

At infinity

Very large

Real and inverted

6

Between F1 and O

On the same side of Very large
the lens as the object

Virtual and erect

Images formed by concave lenses
We can obtain the images obtained by concave lenses using the following rules.
1. When the incident ray is parallel to the principal axis, the refracted ray when extended
backwards, passes through the focus.
2. When the incident ray passes through the focus, the refracted ray is parallel to the
principal axis.

83

As shown in figure 7.9, object PQ is placed between F1 and 2F1 in front of a concave
lens. The incident ray PA, starting from P and going parallel to the principal axis goes
along AD after refraction. If AD is extended backwards, it appears to come from F1.
The incident ray PO, starting from P and passing through O, goes along the same direction
after refraction. PO intersects the extended ray AF1 at P1, i.e. P1 is the image of P.
D

As the point Q is on the principal
axis, its image is formed along the
axis at the point Q1 directly below
P1. Thus, P1Q1 is the image of PQ.
The image formed by a concave
lens is always virtual, erect and
smaller than the object.

Position of the
image
On the first focus F1

Size of the
Nature of the
image
image
Point image Virtual and erect

A

P
P1
2F1

Q

F1

Q1

7.9 Image formed by a concave lens

Sr.
Position of the object
No.
1 At infinity
2

Anywhere between optical Between
optical
centre O and infinity
centre and focus F1

Can you recall?

Small

Virtual and erect

What is the Cartesian sign convention used for spherical
mirrors?

Sign convention
Direction of incident ray
Height above

+ ve

Direction of incident ray
Height above

+ ve

Principal axis x

Principal axis x

- ve
Height below

Height below

- ve

Distance on the left
of the origin (-ve)

Lens formula

Distance on the right
of the origin (+ve)

Distance on the left
of the origin (-ve)

Distance on the right
of the origin (+ve)

7.10 Cartesian sign convention

The formula showing the relation between distance of the object (u), the distance
of the image (v) and the focal length (f) is called the lens formula. It is given below.
1

1

1

- - - = v u
f

The lens formula is same for any spherical lens and any distance
of the object from the lens. It is however necessary to use the sign
convention properly.

84

		 According to the Cartesian sign convention, the optical centre (O) is taken to be
the origin. The principle axis is the X-axis of the frame of reference. The sign
convention is as follows.
1. The object is always placed on the left of the lens, All distances parallel to the principal
axis are measured from the optical centre (O).
2. The distanced measured to the right of O are taken to be positive while those measured
to the left are taken to be negative.
3. Distances perpendicular to the principal axis and above it are taken to be positive.
4. Distances perpendicular to the principal axis and below it are taken to be negative.
5. The focal length of a convex lens is positive while that of a concave lens is negative.
Magnification (M)
The magnification due to a lens is the ratio of the height of the image (h2) to the height
of the object (h1).
h2
Height of the Image
i.e. M =
.................. (1)
Magnification =
h1
Height of the object
The magnification due to a lens is also related to the distance of the object (u) and that
of the image (v) from the lens.
v
Distance of the Image
i.e. M =
.................. (2)
Magnification =
u
Distance of the object
From equations (1) and (2) what is the relation between

Use your brain power ! h , h , u and v?
1
2

Take two convex lenses of different sizes. Collect sunlight on a paper using one of the
lenses. The paper will start burning after a while. Note the time required for the paper to
start burning. Repeat the process for the second lens. Is the time required the same in both
cases? What can you tell from this ?
Power of a lens
The capacity of a lens to converge or diverge incident rays is called its power (P). The
power of a lens depends on its focal length. Power is the inverse of its focal length (f); f is
expressed in meters.
The unit of the power of a lens is Dioptre (D).
1
1
1
Dioptre
=
f (m)
1m
Combination of lenses
If two lenses with focal lengths f1 and f2 are kept in contact with each other, the
combination has an effective focal length given by
1 1
1
-= - + f f1
f2
P =

		
If the powers of the two lenses are P1 and P2 then the effective power of their
combination is P = P1 + P2. Thus, when two lenses are kept touching each other, the
power of the combined lens is equal to the sum of their individual powers.

85

Solved Examples
h2 = v
1. An object is placed vertically at a
Magnification (M) = h
u
1
distance of 20 cm from a convex lens. If
v
the height of the object is 5 cm and the
=
x h1
h
2
focal length of the lens is 10 cm, what will
u
be the position, size and nature of the
20
h2 =
x 5
image? How much bigger will the image
-20
be as compared to the object?
h2 = (-1 ) x 5
Given:
Height of the object (h1) = 5 cm,
h2 = - 5 cm
focal length (f) = 10 cm,
distance of the object (u) = - 20 cm
20
v
M
=
=
= -1
Image distance (v) = ?,
u
-20
Height of the image (h2) = ?,
Magnification (M) = ?
The negative sign of the height of the
image and the magnification shows that
1
1 = 1
the image is inverted and real. It is below
v
u
f
the principal axis and is of the same size as
1 = 1
1
+
the object.
v
u
f
2. The focal length of a convex lens is 20
1 = 1
1
+
cm. What is its power?
v
-20
10
Given: Focal length = f = 20 cm = 0.2 m
1 = -1 + 2
Power of the lens = P = ?
v
20
1
1
1
1
=
,
P
=
=5D
=
v
20
0.2
f (m)
v = 20 cm
The positive sign of the image distance
shows that image is formed at 20 cm on the
other side of the lens.

Observe and Discuss

The power of the lens is 5 D.

Study the model depicting the construction of
human eye with the help of teachers.

Human eye and working of its lens
There is a very thin transparent cover ( membrane) on the human eye. This is called
cornea (fig 7.11). Light enters the eye through it. Maximum amount of incident light is
refracted inside the eye at the outer surface of the cornea. There is a dark, fleshy screen
behind the cornea. This is called the Iris. The colour of the Iris is different for different
people. There is a small hole of changing diameter at the centre of the Iris which is called
the pupil. The pupil controls the amount of light entering the eye. If the light falling on the
eye is too bright, pupil contracts while if the light is dim, it widens. On the surface of the iris,
there is bulge of transparent layers. There is a double convex transparent crystalline lens,
just behind the pupil. The lens provides small adjustments of the focal length to focus the
image. This lens creates real and inverted image of an object on the screen inside the eye.
This screen is made of light sensitive cells and is called the retina. These cells get
excited when light falls on them and generate electric signals. These signals are conveyed
to the brain through optic nerve. Later, the brain analyses these signals and converts them
in such a way that we perceive the objects as they actually are.

86

While seeing objects at large, infinite
distances, the lens of the eye becomes flat and
its focal length increases as shown in part a of
the figure 7.12. While seeing nearby objects
the lens becomes more rounded and its focal
length decreases as shown in part b of the
figure 7.12. This way we can see objects clearly
irrespective of their distance.
Ciliary

Eyelid

Sclera

Pupil

Iris

Corners

Muscles

muscles

The capacity of the lens
to change its focal length as
Iris
per need is called its power of Pupil
accommodation. Although
Crystalline
the elastic lens can change its
lens
focal length, to increase or
decrease it, it can not do so Cornea
beyond a limit.

Optic
nerve
Optic
disc

Sclerotic
coat
Choroid

Lens becomes
rounded

Lens becomes
flat

Light coming from
a distant object

Retina
7.11 Construction of human eye

Light coming
from
a nearby object

a

b

7.12 The change in the shape of the lens while seeing distant and nearby objects.

The minimum distance of an object from a normal eye, at which it is clearly visible
without stress on the eye, is called as minimum distance of distinct vision. The position
of the object at this distance is called the near point of the eye, for a normal human eye,
the near point is at 25 cm. The farthest distance of an object from a human eye, at
which it is clearly visible without stress on the eye is called farthest distance of distinct
vision. The position of the object at this distance is called the far point of the eye. For
a normal human eye, the far point is at infinity.
Do you know ?
The eye ball is approximately spherical and has a diameter of about 2.4 cm. The
working of the lens in human eye is extremely important. The lens can change its
focal length to adjust and see objects at different distances. In a relaxed state, the focal
length of healthy eyes is 2 cm. The other focus of the eye is on the retina.

87

1. Try to read a book keeping it very far from your eyes.
2. Try to read a book keeping it very close to your eyes.
Try this.
3. Try to read a book keeping it at a distance of 25 cm from your eyes.
At which time you see the alphabets clearly? Why?
Defects of Vision and their corrections
Some people can not see things clearly due to loss of accommodation power of the
lenses in their eyes. Because of defective refraction by the lenses their vision becomes
faint and fuzzy. In general, there are three types of refraction defects.
1. Nearsightedness/ Myopia
In this case, the eye can see nearby
objects clearly but the distant objects
appear indistinct.
Nearby objects can be seen clearly
This means that the far point of the eye is
not at infinity but shifts closer to the eye.
In nearsightedness, the image of a distant
object forms in front of the retina (see
figure 7.13). There are two reasons for
Myopic eye
this defect.
1. The curvature of the cornea and the
Concave lens
eye lens increases.The muscles near the
lens can not relax so that the converging
power of the lens remains large.
Correction of Nearsightedness
2. The eyeball elongates so that the
distance between the lens and the retina
7.13 Nearsightedness
increases.
This defect can be corrected by using spectacles with concave lens of proper focal
length. This lens diverges the incident rays and these diverged rays can be converged by
the lens in the eye to form the image on the retina. The focal length of concave lens is
negative, so a lens with negative power is required for correcting nearsightedness. The
power of the lens is different for different eyes depending on the magnitude of their
nearsightedness.
2. Farsightedness or hypermetropia
In this defect the human eye can see
distant objects clearly but cannot see nearby
objects distinctly. This means that the near
point of the eye is no longer at 25 cm but shifts
farther away. As shown in the figure (7.14),
the images of nearby objects get formed behind
the retina.
There are two reasons for farsightedness.
1. Curvature of the cornea and the eye lens
decreases so that, the converging power of the
lens becomes less.
2. Due to the flattening of the eye ball the
distance between the lens and retina decreases.

88

Faraway objects
can be seen clearly

Hypermetropic eye

Convex lens

Correction of Farsightedness

7.14 Farsightedness

This defect can be corrected by using a convex lens with proper focal length. This lens
converges the incident rays before they reach the lens. The lens then converges them to
form the image on the retina.
The focal length of a convex lens is positive thus the spectacles used to correct
farsightedness has positive power. The power of these lenses is different depending on the
extent of farsightedness.
3. Presbyopia
Generally, the focusing power of the eye lens decreases with age. The muscles near
the lens lose their ability to change the focal length of the lens. The near point of the lens
shifts farther from the eye. Because of this old people cannot see nearby objects clearly.
Sometimes people suffer from nearsightedness as well as farsightedness. In such a
case bifocal lenses are required to correct the defect. In such lenses, the upper part is
concave lens and corrects nearsightedness while the lower part is a convex lens which
corrects the farsightedness.
Internet my friend

Try this.

1. Make a list of students in your class using spectacles. Get more information from
the following websites.
2. Record the power of their lenses.
www.physics.org
Find out and note which type of defect of vision
www.britannica.com
they suffer from. Which defect is most common among
the students?
P1
P
Apparent size of an object

Consider two objects, PQ and P1Q1, having same
size but kept at different distances from an eye as
shown in figure 7.15. As the angle α subtended by
PQ at the eye is larger than the angle β subtended by
P1Q1, PQ appears bigger than P1Q1. Thus, the
apparent size of an object depends on the angle
subtended by the object at the eye.

Use your brain power !

α
Q1

QQ

β

7.15 Apparent Size of An object.

1. Why do we have to bring a small object near the
eyes in order to see it clearly?
2. If we bring an object closer than 25 cm from the
eyes, why can we not see it clearly even though it
subtends a bigger angle at the eye?

Use of concave lenses
a. Medical equipments, scanner, CD player – These instuments use laser light. For proper
working of these equipments concave lenses are used.
b. The peep hole in door- This is a small safety device which helps us see a large area
outside the door. This uses one or more concave lenses.
c. Spectacles- Concave lenses are used in spectacles to correct nearsightedness.
d. Torch- Concave lens is used to spread widely the light produced by a small bulb inside
a torch.
e. Camera, telescope and microscope- These instruments mainly use convex lenses. To get
good quality images a concave lens is used in front of the eyepiece or inside it.

89

Use of convex lenses
a. Simple microscope : A convex lens with small focal length produces a virtual, erect
and bigger image of an object as shown in the figure. Such a lens is called simple microscope
or magnifying lens. One can get a 20 times larger image of an object using such microscopes.
These are used for watch repair, testing precious gems and finding their defects.
P1
F
Q1

P
u

Q

P

O

Q

F

f

O

v

a. Object is close to the lens
7.16 Simple microscope

b. Object is at the focus

b. Compound microscope
Simple microscope is used to observe
small sized objects. But minute objects like
blood cells, cells of plants and animals Object u
Fe
and minute living beings like bacteria
cannot be magnified sufficiently by simple
Fo
microscope. Compound microscopes are
u
used to study these objects. A compound
Objective lens
microscope is made of two convex lenses:
Eyepiece
objective and eye piece. The objective has
smaller cross-section and smaller focal
length. The eye piece has bigger crossImage
section, its focal length is also larger than
that of the objective. Higher magnification
7.17 A compound microscope
can be obtained by the combined effect of
the two lenses.
As shown in the figure 7.17, the magnification occurs in two stages. The image formed
by the first lens acts as the object for the second lens. The axes of both lenses are along the
same line. The lenses are fitted inside a metallic tube in such a way that the distance
between can be changed.
c. Telescope
Telescope is used to see distant objects clearly in their magnified form. The telescopes
used to observe astronomical sources like the stars and the planets are called astronomical
telescopes. Telescopes are of two types.
1. Refracting telescope – This uses lenses
2. Reflecting telescope – This uses mirrors and also lenses.
In both of these, the image formed by the objective acts as object for the eye piece
which forms the final image. Objective lens has large diameter and larger focal length
because of which maximum amount of light coming from the distant object can be
collected.

90

On the other hand the size of
Fe
F0
the eyepiece is smaller and its
focal length is also less. Both the
lenses are fitted inside a metallic
tube in such a way that the
distance between them can be
changed. The principal axes of
both the lenses are along the
Eye piece
same straight line. Generally,
Objective
lens
using the same objective but
different eye pieces, different
7.18 Refracting telescope
magnification can be obtained.
e. Spectacles
d. Optical instrument
Convex lenses are used in spectacles
Convex lenses are used in various other
for correcting farsightedness .
optical instruments like camera, projector,
spectrograph etc.
1. Take a burning incense stick in your hand and rotate it fast
along a circle.
Try this.
2. Draw a cage on one side of a cardboard and a bird on the other
side. Hang the cardboard with the help of a thread. Twist the
thread and leave it. What do you see and why?
Persistence of vision
We see an object because the eye lens creates its image on the retina. The image is on
the retina as long as the object is in front of us. The image disappears as soon as the object
is taken away. However, this is not instantaneous and the image remains imprinted on our
retina for 1/16th of a second after the object is removed. The sensation on retina persists
for a while. This is called persistence of vision. What examples in day to day life can you
think about this?
Can you tell?

How do we perceive different colours?

The retina in our eyes is made up of many light sensitive cells. These cells are shaped
like a rod and like a cone. The rod like cells respond to the intensity of light and give
information about the brightness or dimness of the object to the brain. The conical cells
respond to the colour and give information about the colour of the object to the brain.
Brain processes all the information received and we see the actual image of the object.
Rod like cells respond to faint light also but conical cells do not. Thus we perceive colours
only in bright light. The conical cells can respond differently to red, green and blue colours.
When red colour falls on the eyes, the cells responding to red light get excited more than
those responding to other colours and we get the sensation of red colour. Some people lack
conical cells responding to certain colours. These persons cannot recognize those colours
or cannot distinguish between different colours. These persons are said to be colour blind.
Apart from not being able to distinguish between different colours, their eye sight is
normal.

91

Exercise
1. Match the columns in the following
table and explain them.
Column 1

Column 2

Nearby object
Farsightedness can be seen
clearly
Far away
Presbyopia
object can be
seen clearly
Problem of old
Nearsightedness
age

8. Solve the following examples.
i. Doctor has prescribed a lens having
power +1.5 D. What will be the focal
length of the lens? What is the type
of the lens and what must be the
defect of vision?
(Ans: +0.67m, farsightedness)

Column 3
Bifocal
lens
Concave
lens

ii. 5 cm high object is placed at a
distance of 25 cm from a converging
lens of focal length of 10 cm.
Determine the position, size and type
of the image.
(Ans : 16.7 cm, 3.3 cm, Real)

Convex
lens

2. Draw a figure explaining various
terms related to a lens.
3. At which position will you keep an
object in front of a convex lens so as
to get a real image of the same size as
the object ? Draw a figure.
4. Give scientific reasons:
a. Simple microscope is used for
watch repairs.
b. One can sense colours only in
bright light.
c. We can not clearly see an object
kept at a distance less than 25 cm
from the eye.
5. Explain the working
astronomical
telescope
refraction of light.

of

iii. Three lenses having power 2, 2.5
and 1.7 D are kept touching in a row.
What is the total power of the lens
combination?
(Ans : 6.2 D)
iv. An object kept 60 cm from a lens
gives a virtual image 20 cm in front
of the lens. What is the focal length
of the lens? Is it a converging lens or
diverging lens?
(Ans: -30 cm, lens is diverging or concave)
Project :
		Make a Power point presentation
about the construction and use of
binoculars.

an
using

6. Distinguish between:
a. Farsightedness and Nearsightedness
b. Concave lens and Convex Lens

²²²

7. What is the function of iris and the
muscles connected to the lens in
human eye?

92

8. Metallurgy
Ø Physical properties of metals
Ø Physical properties of nonmetals
Ø Chemical properties of metals
Ø Reactivity series of metals
Ø Chemical properties of nonmetals Ø Ionic compounds.
Ø Metallurgy: Various concepts.  
Earth was born about 4.5 billion years ago. Various formative processes have been
taking place in the core of the earth and its surroundings since its creation till today. These
have resulted in the formation of various ores, liquids and gases.
Which method do we use when we want to study many things

Think about it together and at the same time?

The substances around us are in the form of some or the other elements or their
compounds. In the beginning, elements were classified in accordance with their chemical
and physical properties into the types metals, nonmetals and metalloids, and these are in
use even today. You have studied their characteristics in the last standard. We are going
to get more information about them in this lesson.

Can you tell?

What are the physical properties of metals and nonmetals?

Physical properties of metals
Metals exist mainly in solid state. The metals namely, mercury and gallium exist in
liquid state at room temperature. Metals possess luster. The metallic luster goes on
decreasing due to exposure to atmospheric oxygen and moisture and also in presence of
some reactive gases.
We know that metals have the properties namely, ductility and malleability. Similarly,
all metals are good conductors of heat and electricity. Generally, all metals are hard.
However, the alkali metals from group 1 such as lithium, sodium and potassium are
exceptions. These metals can be cut with knife as they are very soft. Metals have high
melting and boiling points. For example, tungsten metal has the highest melting point
(3422 0C). On the contrary, the melting and boiling points of the metals such as sodium,
potassium, mercury, gallium are very low. A sound is produced when certain metals are
struck. This is called sonority. These metals are known as sonorous metals.
Physical properties of nonmetals
When properties of nonmetals are considered, it is found that some nonmetals are in
solid state while some are in gaseous state. Exception is the nonmetal bromine which
exists in liquid state. Nonmetals do not possess luster, but iodine is the exception as its
crystals are shiny. Nonmetals are not hard. Diamond which as an allotrope of carbon is
the exception. Diamond is the hardest natural substance. Nonmetals have low melting and
boiling points. Nonmetals are bad conductors of electricity and heat. Graphite, an allotrope
of carbon, is an exception, as it is a good conductor of electricity.

93

Chemical properties of metals
Metals are reactive. They lose
electrons easily and become
positively charged ions. That is why
metals are called electropositive
elements.

Try this.

Do you know ?
Substances which are good conductors of heat
are usually good conductors of electricity as well.
Similarly bad conductors of heat are also bad
conductors of electricity. The exception is diamond
which is bad conductor of electricity but good
conductor of heat.

Apparatus : Pair of tongs or spatula, knife, burner, etc.
Chemicals : Samples of aluminium, copper, iron,
lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium.
(Note: Use sodium carefully, in presence of teacher)

Metal sample held
on a spatula

Procedure : Hold the sample of each of the above
metals at the top of the flame of a burner with the help
Burner
of a pair of tongs, or a spatula.
1. Which metal catches fire readily?
2. How does the surface of a metal appear on
catching fire?
3. What is the colour of the flame while the metal is
burning on the flame?
8.1 Combustion of metal
Reactions of Metals:
a. Reaction of metals with oxygen
Metals combine with oxygen on heating in air and metal oxides are formed. Sodium
and potassium are very reactive metals. Sodium metal combines with oxygen in the air
even at room temperature and forms sodium oxide.
					4Na(s) + O2 (g)
2Na2O(s)
On exposure to air sodium readily catches fire. Therefore, to prevent accident in the
laboratory or elsewhere it is kept in kerosene. Oxides of some metals are soluble in water.
They react with water to form alkali.
				
Na2O (s) + H2O (l)
2NaOH (aq)
We know that magnesium oxide is formed on burning magnesium ribbon in the air.
Magnesium oxide reacts with water to form an alkali, called magnesium hydroxide.
				

2Mg(s) + O2 (g)

2 MgO(s)

				

MgO + H2O

Mg(OH)2

b. Reaction of metals with water
Apparatus : Beakers.
Chemicals : Samples of various metals (Important note : Sodium metal should not be
			
taken), water.
Procedure : Drop a piece of each of the metal in separate beakers filled with cold water.
1. Which metal reacts with water?
2. Which metal floats on water? Why? Prepare a table with reference to the above
procedure and note your observations in it.

94

Sodium and potassium metal react rapidly and vigorously with water and liberates
hydrogen gas.
2NaOH (aq) + H2(g) + heat
2Na (s) + 2H2O (l)
2KOH (aq) + H2(g) + heat
2K(s) + 2H2O (l)
On the other hand, calcium reacts with water slowly and less vigorously. The hydrogen
gas released in this reaction collects on the surface of the metal in the form of bubbles and
the metal floats on water.
2Ca(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)
2Ca(s) + 2H2O (l)
The metals; aluminium, iron and zinc do not react with cold or hot water, but they
react with steam to form their oxides. Hydrogen gas is released in this reaction.
2Al(s) + 3H2O(g)
3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g)
Zn(s) + H2O(g)

Al2O3 (s) + 3H2(g)
Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)
ZnO(s) + H2(g)

Metal sample
hydrogen gas

Glass-wool soaked
in water
burner

cork
stand

water

hydrogen
gas

8.2 Reaction of a metal with water

Try out and think about it

Test whether the metals gold, silver and copper
react with water and think over the finding.

c. Reaction of metals with oxygen
In the earlier chapter we
Delivery tube
have looked into reaction of
Hydrogen
Stand
gas burning
metals with acids. Are all the
with cracking
metals equally reactive?
noise
When samples of aluminium,
Candle
Test Tube
magnesium, iron or zinc are
Bubbles
dil HCl
of
treated with dilute sulphuric or
hydrogen
Soap
hydrochloric acid, sulphate or
gas
Zinc
solution
granules
chloride salts of metals are
formed. Hydrogen gas is
liberated in this reaction. The
Soap
bubbles
reactivity of these metals can
be indicated by the following
sequence.
8.3 Reaction of metals with dilute acid
Mg > Al > Zn > Fe

95

				

Mg(s) + 2HCl (aq)

MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)

2Al (s) + 6HCl (aq)

2AlCl3(aq) +3H2(g)

Fe(s) + 2HCl (aq)

FeCl2(aq) + H2(g)

Zn (s) + HCl (aq)

ZnCl2(aq) + H2(g)

d. Reaction of metals with nitric acid
Nitrate salts of metals are formed on reaction of metals with nitric acid. Various
oxides of nitrogen (N2O, NO, NO2) are also formed in accordance with the concentration
of nitric acid.

		

Cu(s) + 4 HNO3 (aq)
(Concentrated)

Cu (NO3)2 (aq) + 2NO2(g) + 2H2O (l)

3 Cu(s) + 8HNO3 (aq)
(Dilute)

Cu (NO3)2 (aq) + 2NO(g) + 4H2O (l)

Aqua Regia: Aqua regia is a highly corrosive and fuming liquid. It is one of the
few reagents which can dissolve the noble metals like gold and platinum. Aqua regia
is freshly prepared by mixing concentrated hydrochloric acid and concentrated nitric
acid in the ratio 3:1.
e.

Reaction of metals with salts of other metals
Try this.

Procedure:

Apparatus: Copper wire, iron nail, beaker or big test tube etc.
Chemicals: Aqueous solutions of ferrous sulphate and copper
			
sulphate.

1. Take a clean copper wire and a
clean iron nail.

Cork
Thread

2. Dip the copper wire in ferrous
sulphate solution and the iron nail
in copper sulphate solution.

Test tube

3. Keep on observing continually at
a fixed interval of time.

Test tube
stand

Iron nail
CuSO4
solution

a. In which test tube a reaction has
taken place?

Copper wire
FeSO4
solution

Copper coating
formed on iron nail

b. How did you recognize that a
reaction has taken place?

8.4 Reaction of metal with solution
of salts of other metals

c. What is the type of the reaction?

Reactivity series of metals
We have seen that reactivity of all metals is not the same. However, the reagents
oxygen, water and acids are not useful to determine the relative reactivities of all the metals,
as all the metals do not react with them. The displacement reaction of metals with solutions
of salts of other metals serves this purpose. If a metal A displaces another metal B from the
solution of its salt then it means that the metal A is more reactive than the metal B.

96

Metal A + Salt solution of metal B
Salt solution of metal A + Metal B
Answer from your observations in the previous activity 8.4, which metal is more
reactive, copper or iron?
In the previous activity, iron has displaced copper from copper sulphate. It means that
metallic iron is more reactive than metallic copper.
Potassium
Sodium
React with water
Lithium
Calcium

Higher

Reactivity

React with acids

Magnesium
Aluminium
Zinc
Iron
Tin
Lead

React with oxygen

Copper
Mercury
Silver

Lower

Scientists have developed the
reactivity series by doing many
experiments of displacement
reaction. The arrangement of
metals in the increasing or
decreasing order of reactivity is
called the reactivity series of
metals. Metals are divided into
the following groups according to
their reactivity.
1. Highly reactive metals.
2. Moderately reactive metals.
3. Less reactive metals.

Gold

8.5 Reactivity series of metals.

f. Reaction of metals with nonmetals
Noble gases (like helium, neon, argon) do not take part in the chemical reactions. So
far, we have seen from the reactions of metals that cations are formed by oxidation of
metals. If we look into the electronic configuration of some metals and nonmetals, it will
be seen that the driving force behind a reaction is to attain the electronic configuration of
the nearest noble gas with complete octet. Metals do this by losing electrons while
nonmetals do this by gaining electrons. The outermost shell of noble gases being complete,
they are chemically inert.
You have seen in the last standard that the ionic compound sodium chloride is formed
as sodium metal gives away one electron while the nonmetal chlorine takes up one electron.
2 Na + Cl2

(Metal) (nonmetal)

		 Similarly, magnesium and potassium form
(ionic compound) the ionic compounds MgCl2 and KCl, respectively.
2 NaCl

Chemical properties of nonmetals
Nonmetals are a collection of elements having less similarity in physical and chemical
properties. Nonmetals are also called electronegative elements, as they form negatively
charged ions by accepting electron. Some examples of chemical reactions of nonmetals
are as follows.
1.Reaction of nonmetals with oxygen:
Generally, nonmetals combine with
oxygen to form acidic oxides.
In some cases, neutral oxides are formed.

C + O2 Complete combustion CO2 (Acidic)

97

2C + O2 Partial Combustion

2CO(Neutral)

S + O2

SO2 (Acidic)

Combustion

2. Reaction of nonmetals with water : Generally, nonmetals do not react with water,
except the halogens. For example, chlorine on dissolving in water gives the following
reaction.
HOCl(aq) + HCl(aq)
Cl2 (g) + H2O(l)
3. Reaction of dilute acids with nonmetals : Generally, nonmetals do not react with
dilute acids, halogens are exception to this. For example, chlorine reacts with dilute
hydrobromic acid by the following reaction.
Cl2 (g) + 2HBr (aq)
2HCl(aq) + Br2(aq)
4. Reaction of nonmetals with hydrogen : 		
Nonmetals react with hydrogen under certain
S + H2
H2S
condition (such as proper temperature, pressure, N + 3H
2NH3
2
2
use of catalyst, etc.)
In the reaction between chlorine and HBr a transformation of
Use your brain power ! HBr into Br2 takes place. Can this transformation be called
oxidation? Which is the oxidant that brings about this oxidation?
Ionic compounds
The compounds formed from two units, namely cation and anion are called ionic
compounds. The cation and anion being oppositely charged, there is an electrostatic force
of attraction between them. You know that, this force of attraction between cation and
anion is called as the ionic bond. The number of cations and anions in a compound and
the magnitude of the electric charge on them is such that the positive and negative charges
balance each other. As a result, an ionic compound is electrically neutral.
Ionic compounds are crystalline in nature. The surfaces of all the particles of a
crystalline substance have a definite shape and are smooth and shiny. The regular
arrangement of ions in the solid ionic compounds is responsible for their crystalline nature.
The arrangement of ions is different in different ionic compounds, and therefore the shapes
of their crystals are different. The main factor that determines the general arrangement of
ions in a crystal is the attractive force between oppositely charged ions and the repulsive
force between similarly charged ions. Because of this the general crystalline structure has
negative ions arranged around a positive ion and positive ions arranged around a negative
ion. Two of the important factors responsible for a certain crystal structure are as follows.
1) Size of the positively and negatively charged ions.
2) Magnitude of the electrical charge on the ions.
The electrostatic attraction in the neighbouring ions with opposite charges is very
strong. That is why the melting points of ionic compounds are high. Also, the ionic
compounds are hard and brittle.
Properties of ionic compounds
Apparatus: Metal spatula, burner, carbon electrodes, beaker, cell, 		
lamp, press key, electrical wires, etc.
Chemicals: Samples of sodium chloride, potassium iodide and 		
			
barium chloride, water.
Procedure: Observe the above samples. Place sample of one of the above salts on the spatula and
heat it on flame of the burner. Repeat the procedure using the other salts. As shown in the figure,
assemble an electrolyte cell. Assemble an electrolytic cell by using a beaker and connecting the
carbon electrodes to the positive and negative terminal of the cell. Dip the electrodes in solution
of any one of the salts. Do you see the lamp glowing? Check this with all the other salts as well.

Try this.

98

General properties of ionic compounds
1. The attractive force between the positively
and negatively charged ions is strong
Therefore, the ionic compounds exist in solid
state and are hard.
Burner
2. The ionic compounds are brittle and can be
broken into pieces by applying pressure.
3. The intermolecular force of attraction is high
in ionic compounds and, large energy is
a. To heat salt sample
required to overcome it. Therefore, the
electric cell
melting and boiling points of ionic compounds
lamp
are high. (see table 8.7)
press key
4. Ionic compounds are water soluble. This is
because the water molecules orient in a
particular manner around the ions separated
beaker
by dissociation process. As a result of this a
new force of attraction is established between
graphite rod
the ion and the surrounding water molecules,
salt solution
replacing the original intermolecular
attraction; and aqueous solutions of ionic
compounds are formed. Ionic compounds are
however, insoluble in solvents like kerosene
b. To check conductivity of salt solution and petrol. This is because unlike water a
8.6 To verify the properties
new attractive force can not be established in
of ionic compounds
these solvents.
5. The ionic compounds cannot conduct
ionic/
Melting Boiling
electricity when in solid state. In this Compound
nonionic point 0C point 0C
state the ions cannot leave their places.
However, in the fused/molten state
nonionic
0
100
H2O
they can conduct electricity, as in this
ZnCl2
ionic
290
732
state the ions are mobile. The aqueous
solutions of ionic compounds conduct
MgCl2
ionic
714
1412
electricity as they contain the
NaCl
ionic
801
1465
dissociated ions. On passing current
through the solution the ions move to
NaBr
ionic
747
1390
the oppositely charged electrodes. Due
KCl
ionic
772
1407
to the electrical conductivity in fused
and dissolved state the
ionic
MgO
ionic
2852
3600
compounds are called electrolytes.
salt sample

8.6 Melting and boiling points of some ionic
compounds

Metallurgy
The science and technology regarding the extraction of metals from ores and their
purification for the use is called metallurgy.
Occurrence of metals
Most metals being reactive do not occur in nature in free state but are found in
combined state as their salts such as oxides, carbonates, sulphides and nitrates. However,
the most unreactive metals that are not affected by air, water and other natural factors like
silver, gold, platinum, generally occur in free state. The compounds of metals that occur
in nature along with the impurities are called minerals.

99

The minerals from which the metal can be separated economically are called ores.
Ores contain many types of impurities such as soil, sand and rocky substances along with
the metal compounds. These impurities are called gangue. Metals can be extracted from
their ores by means of various methods of separation. The process of extraction of metal
in pure state from the ores is also a part of metallurgy.
Ores are taken out from the mines and the gangue is usually separated from the ore at
the site itself by various methods. Then the ores are carried out to the place where metals
are produced. There metals are extracted in pure form. Then metals are further purified by
different methods of purification. This entire process is called metallurgy.
Basic principles of metallurgy
Pure metal is obtained from the ore by the following stages.
1. Concentration of ores
The process of separating gangue from the ores is called concentration of ores. In this
process the concentration of the compound of the desired metal is increased. Various ways
are used for this purpose. However, exact way to be used depends upon the physical
properties of the metal present in the ores and the gangue. It also depends upon the
reactivity of the metal and the facilities available for the purification. Various factors that
could be responsible for the environmental pollution are also considered. Some general
methods for the concentration of ores are as follows.
a. Separation based on gravitation
The heavy particles of ores can be easily separated from the light particles of gangue
by the gravitational method. The processes to carry out this separation are as follows.
i.

Wilfley table method

In this method of separation, the
Wilfley table is made by fixing narrow and
thin wooden riffles on inclined surface.
The table is kept vibrating continuously.
Powdered ore obtained from lumps of the
ore using ball mill is poured on the table
and a stream of water is also released from
the upper side. As a result, the lighter
gangue particles are carried away along
with the flowing water, while the heavier
particles in which proportion of minerals is
more and proportion of gangue is less, are
blocked by the wooden riffles and get
collected on the slits between them.

powdered ore
water

slits
vibrating
table
gangue
concentrated ore

8.8 Wilfley table method

ii. Hydraulic separation method

The hydraulic separation method is based on the working of a mill. There is a tapering
vessel similar to that used in a grinding mill. It opens in a tank-like container that is
tapering on the lower side. The tank has an outlet for water on the upper side and a water
inlet on the lower side.

100

powdered ore

Finely ground ore is released in the
tank. A forceful jet of water is introduced
in the tank from the lower side. Gangue
particles are lighter and therefore they flow
out along with the water jet from the outlet
on the upper side of the tank and get
collected separately. At the same time the
heavy particles of the ore are collected at
the bottom from the lower side of the tank.
In short, this method is based on the law of
gravitation, wherein particles of the same
size are separated by their weight with the
help of water.

gangue
ore suspension
water
concentrated
ore

8.9 Hydraulic separation

b. Magnetic separation Method : This method requires an electromagnetic machine.
The main parts of this machine are two types of iron rollers and the conveyor belt moving
continuously around them. One of the rollers is nonmagnetic while the other is
electromagnetic. The conveyor belt moving around the rollers is (nonmagnetic) made up
of leather or brass. The powdered ore is poured on the conveyor belt near the nonmagnetic
roller. Two collector vessels are placed below the magnetic roller.
The particles of the nonmagnetic
part in the ore are not attracted
Powdered ore
Nonmagnetic
towards the magnetic roller.
roller
Therefore, they are carried further
Magnetic
along the belt and fall in the
Nonmagnetic
roller
collector vessel places is away
ingredient
from the magnetic roller. At the
Conveyor belt
same time the particles of the
Magnetic ingredient
magnetic ingredients of the ore Collectors
Collector
stick to the magnetic roller and
therefore fall in the collector vessel
8.10 Magnetic separation
near the magnetic roller.
In this way the magnetic and nonmagnetic ingredients in the ore can be separated
depending on their magnetic nature. For example, cassiterite is a tin ore. It contains mainly
the nonmagnetic ingredient stannic oxide (SnO2) and the magnetic ingredient ferrous
tungstate (FeWO4). These are separated by the electromagnetic method.
c.

Froth floatation method
The froth floatation method is based on the two
opposite properties, hydrophilic and hydrophobic, of
the particles. Here the particles of the metal sulphides,
due to their hydrophobic property, get wetted mainly
with oil, while due to the hydrophilic property the
gangue particles get wetted with water. By using these
properties certain ores are concentrated by froth
floatation method.

101

Internet my friend
Collect the information
about the different steps of
metal extraction & explain it
in the class.
Collect the related videos.

In this method the finely ground ore
is put into a big tank containing ample
amount of water. Certain vegetable oil Air supply
such as pine oil, eucalyptus oil is added
in the water for the formation of froth.
Froth
Concentrated
Pressurised air is blown through the
sulphide ore
water. There is an agitator rotating
around its axis in the centre of the
floatation tank. The agitator is used as Bubbles
per the requirement. Bubbles are formed
due to the blown air. Due to agitation a Water and
foam is formed from oil, water and air Pine oil
bubbles together, due to the agitating.
Agitator
Gangue
This foam rises to the surface of water
and floats. That is why this method is
8.11 Froth floatation method
called froth floatation process.
Particles of certain sulphide ore float with the foam on water as they preferentially get
wetted by the oil. For example, this method is used for the concentration of zinc blend (ZnS)
and copper pyrite (CuFeS2)
d. Leaching
Do you know ?
The first step in the extraction of the metals aluminium,
gold and silver from their ores is the method of leaching. In
Water does not stick
this method the ore is soaked in a certain solution for a
to colocasia leaves.
long time. The ore dissolves in that solution due to a
Similarly, water does not
specific chemical reaction. The gangue, however, does not
stick to wax. On the other
react and therefore does not dissolve in that solution. So it
hand common salt or
can be separated. For example, concentration of bauxite,
soap stick to water that
the aluminium ore, is done by leaching method. Here
is, they get wetted by
bauxite is soaked in aqueous NaOH or aqueous Na2CO3
water.
which dissolves the main ingredient alumina in it.

Can you recall?

What is the electronic definition of oxidation and reduction?

During the extraction of metals from their ores, metal is obtained from the cation of
metal. In this process the metal cation is to be reduced. How to bring about the reduction
depends upon the reactivity of the metal. We have already learnt about the reactivity series
of metals.
2. Extraction of metals
a. Extraction of reactive metals
The metals at the top of the reactivity series are highly reactive. Their reactivity decreases
down the series. For example, potassium, sodium, aluminium are reactive metals. Reactive
metals have large capacity to form cations by losing the electrons in their outermost shell.
For example, reactive metals react vigorously with dilute acids to give hydrogen gas. Highly
reactive metals burn by reacting with oxygen from air at room temperature. Their extraction
has to be done by electrolytic reduction. For example, the metals sodium, calcium and
magnesium are obtained by electrolysis of their molten chloride salts. In this process metal
is deposited on the cathode while chlorine gas is liberated at the anode. The electrode reactions
during the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride to get metallic sodium are as shown below.

102

Cathode reaction

Na+ + e-

Anode reaction

2 Cl

Na (Reduction)

-

Use your brain power !

Cl2 + 2e- (Oxidation)
Write the electrode reaction for electrolysis of
molten magnesium chloride and calcium chloride.

We are now going to see how aluminium is obtained by electrolytic reduction of
aluminium oxide in the ore bauxite.
Extraction of Aluminium.
Aluminium Symbol : Al
Atomic number : 13

Colour : Silver white
Electronic configuration: 2, 8, 3

Valency : 3

Aluminium being reactive metal does not occur in nature in free state. Aluminium is
the third highly abundant element in the earth crust after oxygen and silicon. Aluminium
is extracted from its ore bauxite (Al2O3.nH2O). Bauxite contains 30% to 70% of Al2O3 and
remaining part is gangue. It is made up of sand, silica, iron oxide etc. There are two steps
in the extraction of aluminium.
i. Concentration of bauxite ore:
Bauxite is the main ore of aluminium. Silica (SiO2), ferric oxide (Fe2O3) and titanium
oxide (TiO2) are the impurities present in bauxite. Separation of these impurities is done
by leaching process using either Bayer’s method or Hall’s method. In both these methods
finally the concentrated alumina is obtained by calcination.
In the Bayer’s process the ore is first ground in a ball mill. Then it is leached by heating
with concentrated solution of caustic soda (NaOH) at 140 to 150 0C under high pressure
for 2 to 8 hours in a digester. Aluminium oxide being amphoteric in nature, it reacts with
the aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide to form water soluble sodium aluminate. This
means that bauxite is leached by sodium hydroxide solution.
Al2O3 2H2O (s) + 2 NaOH (aq)

2NaAlO2 (aq) + 3 H2O (l)

The iron oxide in the gangue does not dissolve in aqueous sodium hydroxide. It is
separated by filtration. However, silica in the gangue dissolves in aqueous sodium
hydroxide to form water soluble sodium silicate.
Aqueous sodium aluminate is diluted by putting in water and is cooled to 50 0C. This
results in precipitation of aluminium hydroxide.
			

NaAlO2 + 2H2O

NaOH + Al(OH)3

In the Hall’s process the ore is powdered and then leached by heating with aqueous
sodium carbonate in the digester to form water soluble sodium aluminate. Then the
insoluble impurities are filtered out. The filtrate is warmed and neutralised by passing
carbon dioxide gas through it. This results in the precipitation of aluminium hydroxide.

103

Al2O3 2H2O (s) + Na2CO3(aq)

2NaAlO2(aq) + CO2 + 2 H2O (l)

2NaAlO2(aq) + 3H2O + CO2(g)

2Al (OH)3

+ Na2CO3

The precipitate of Al(OH)3 obtained in both, Bayer’s and Hall’s processes is filtered,
washed, dried and then calcined by heating at 1000 0C to obtain alumina.
Al2O3 + 3H2O

2Al(OH)3

Anode (Graphite)

ii. Electrolytic reduction of alumina
a. In this method electrolysis
Cathode
of molten mixture of
(Graphite lining)
alumina (melting point >
Mixture of alumina,
Steel
2000 0C) is done in a steel
tank
cryolite and fluorspar
tank. The tank has a
graphite lining on the inner Molten
Outlet for molten
aluminium
side. This lining does the aluminium
work of a cathode. A set of
graphite rods dipped in the
8.12 Extraction of aluminium
molten electrolyte works as
b. Aluminium is deposited on the cathode on
anode. Cryolite (Na3AlF6)
passing electric current. Molten aluminium being
and fluorspar (CaF2) are
heavier than the electrolyte, is collected at the bottom
added in the mixture to
of the tank. It is taken out from there from time to time,
lower its melting point up
Oxygen gas is liberated at the anode.
to 1000 0C.
		 The electrode reactions are as shown below.
Anode reaction 2O2O2 + 4e- (Oxidation)
3+
Al (l) (Reduction)
Cathode reaction Al + 3e
The liberated oxygen reacts with the anodes to form carbon dioxide gas. The anodes
have to be changed from time to time as they get oxidised during the electrolysis of alumina.
b. Extraction of moderately reactive metals
What are the moderately reactive metals?
In which form do the moderately reactive metals occur in 		
nature?
The metals in the middle of the reactivity series such as iron, zinc, lead, copper are
moderately reactive. Usually they occur in the form of their sulphide salts or carbonate. It
is easier to obtain metals from their oxides rather than sulphides or carbonates. Therefore,
the sulphide ores are strongly heated in air to transform them into oxides. This process is
called roasting. Carbonate ores are strongly heated in a limited supply of air to transform
them into oxides. This process is called calcination.
The following reactions occur during roasting and calcination of zinc ore.

Can you tell?

1.
2.

Roasting

2 ZnS + 3O2

Calcination

ZnCO3

2 ZnO + 2 SO2
ZnO +CO2

104

The zinc oxide so obtained is reduced to zinc by using suitable reductant such as
carbon.
ZnO + C
Zn + CO
Apart from carbon, reactive metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium are also
used as reducing agent for the reduction of metal oxide to obtain the metal. This is because
these metals displace a moderately reactive metal from its compound. For example, when
manganese dioxide is ignited with aluminium powder the following reaction takes place.
3Mn + 2Al2O3 + heat
3 MnO2 + 4 Al
Identify the substances undergone oxidation and reduction in this reaction.
The heat evolved in the above reaction is so large that the metal is formed in the
molten state. Another similar example is the thermit reaction. Here, iron oxide reacts with
aluminium to form iron and aluminium oxide.
2 Fe + Al2O3 + heat
Fe2O3 + 2 Al
Do you know ?
Hot steel from
thermit
reaction
Transverse
section
of rail

Methods used for welding rails

Slag
Crucible
Tapping device

Slag

Mold

Weld

Rail
8.13 Thermit Welding

c. Extraction of less reactive metals
The metals at the bottom of the reactivity series of metals are less reactive. That is
why they are found in free state in nature. For example gold, silver, platinum. The reserves
of copper in free state are very few. Presently copper is found mainly in the form of Cu2S.
Copper is obtained from Cu2S ore just by heating in air.
2 Cu2O + 2SO2
2Cu2S + 3O2
2 Cu2O + Cu2S
6Cu + SO2

Collect information

Collect the information regarding how mercury is
extracted from its ore cinnabar and write the
corresponding chemical reaction.

3. Refining of metals
Metals obtained by the various reduction processes described above are not very pure.
They contain impurities. The impurities need to be separated to obtain pure metal.
Electrolysis method is used to obtain pure metals from impure metals.

105

Corrosion of metals
Can you recall?

1. What is meant by corrosion?
2. Have you seen the following things?

Old iron bars of buildings, copper vessels not cleaned for long time, silver ornaments
or idols exposed to air for long time, old abandoned vehicles fit to be thrown away.

Think about it

1) Why do silver articles turn blackish while copper vessels
turn greenish on keeping in air for a long time?
2) Why do pure gold and platinum always glitter?

Rusting of iron articles causes large financial loss. Thus corrosion of iron, that is,
rusting is a big problem.
1. Iron reacts with moist air and a deposit
of reddish substance (Fe2O3 . H2O) is
formed on it. This substance is called
rust.
2. Carbon dioxide in moist air reacts with
the surface of copper vessel. Copper
loses its luster due to formation of
greenish layer of copper carbonate
Blackened silver vessel
(CuCO3) on its surface. This is called
patination of copper.		
3. On exposure to air, silver articles turn
blackish after some time. This is because
of the layer of silver sulphide (Ag2S)
The copper cladded
formed by the reaction of silver with
statue of Liberty made
hydrogen sulphide in air.
300 years ago has
Rusted
shackles
turned green.
4. By oxidation of aluminium, a thin layer
of aluminium oxide forms on it.
8.14 Effects of corrosion

Prevention of corrosion

1. Which measures would you suggest to stop the corrosion of
metallic articles or not to allow the corrosion to start?
Can you tell?
2. What is done so to prevent rusting of iron windows and iron
doors of your house?
Various methods are used to protect metals from corrosion. Special attention is paid
in almost all the methods so that iron does not rust. We can lower the rate of the process
of rusting of iron. Corrosion of metals can be stopped by keeping metals isolated from a
direct contact with air. The prevention of corrosion can be achieved by various ways.
Some of these methods are as follows.
1. To fix a layer of some substance on the metal surface so that the contact of the
metal with moisture and oxygen in the air is prevented and no reaction would occur
between them.
2. To prevent corrosion of metals by applying a layer of paint, oil, grease or varnish
on their surface. For example, corrosion of iron can be prevented by this method.

106

Use your brain power !

Can we permanently prevent the rusting of an iron
article by applying a layer of paint on its surface?

We cannot protect the articles permanently from rusting by painting them. The method
of painting is suitable for short time. If there is a scratch on the paint on the surface of the
article and if a small surface of the metal comes in contact with air, the process of rusting
starts below the layer of the paint.
Why do new iron sheets appear shiny?
Corrosion can be prevented by putting a layer of noncorrodible metal on a corrodible
metal. This can be done in many ways.
1. Galvanizing
In this method a thin layer of zinc is applied to prevent corrosion of iron or steel. For
example, shining iron nails, pins, etc. In this method corrosion of zinc occurs first because
zinc is more electropositive than iron. After a few rainy seasons the zinc layer goes away
and the inner iron gets exposed. Then iron starts rusting.
Inspection

Cooling

Caustic
Cleaning

Rinsing

Pickling

Flux
solution

Rinsing

Drying

Zinc bath

8.15 Galvanizing process

2. Tinning
In this method a layer of molten tin is deposited on metals. We call this as ‘kalhaee’.A
greenish layer forms on the surface of a copper or brass vessel. This greenish layer is
poisonous. If buttermilk or curry is placed in such a vessel it gets spoiled. Tinning is done
to prevent all such damages.
3. Anodization
In this method metals like copper, aluminium are coated with a thin and strong layer
of their oxides by means of electrolysis. For this the copper or aluminium article is used as
anode. As this oxide layer is strong and uniform all over the surface, it is useful for
prevention of the corrosion of the metal.
For example, when aluminium is
anodised, the thin layer of aluminium oxide
is formed. It obstructs the contact of the
aluminium with oxygen and water. This
prevents further oxidation. This protection
can be further increased by making the
oxide layer thicker during the anodization.

Power
supply

Anode

8.16 Anodization

107

Cathode

4. Electroplating
In this method a less reactive metal is coated
on a more reactive metal by electrolysis. Silver
plated spoons, gold plated ornaments are the
examples of electroplating.
5. Alloying
Majority of the metallic substances used
presently are in the form of alloys. The main
intention behind this is to decrease the intensity of
corrosion of metals. The homogenous mixture
formed by mixing a metal with other metals or
nonmetals in certain proportion is called an alloy.
For example, bronze is an alloy formed from 90%
copper and 10 % tin. Bronze statues do not get
affected by sun and rain. Stainless steel does not
get stains with air or water and also does not rust.
It is an alloy made from 74% iron, 18% chromium
and 8% carbon. In recent times various types of
alloys are used for minting coins.

Cell

Cathode
Aluminium
spoon

Anode
silver
plate

8.17 Electroplating

8.18 Coins made from 		
various alloys

Do you know ?
When one of the metals in an alloy is mercury the alloy is called amalgam. For
example, sodium amalgam, zinc amalgam, etc. Silver amalgam was earlier used by
dentists. Gold amalgam is used for extraction of gold.

Collect information

1. What are the various alloys used in daily life? Where
are those used?
2. What are the properties that the alloy used for minting
coins should have?

Exercise
1. Write names.
a. Alloy of sodium with mercury.
b. Molecular formula of the common ore
of aluminium.
c. The oxide that forms salt and water by
reacting with both acid and base.
d. The device used for grinding an ore.
e. The nonmetal having electrical
conductivity.
f. The reagent that dissolves noble metals.

2. Make pairs of substances and their
		properties
Substance
Property			
a. Potassium
1.Combustible
bromide 		
2.Soluble in water
b. Gold
3.No chemical reaction
c. Sulphur
4.High ductility.
d. Neon

108

3. Identify the pairs of metals and their
9. Write chemical equation for the 		
ores from the following.
following events.
a. Aluminium came in contact with air.
Group A 					
Group B
b. Iron filings are dropped in aqueous
a. Bauxite 					
i. Mercury
solution of copper sulphate.
b. Cassiterite 					
ii. Aluminium
c. A reaction was brought about between
c. Cinnabar				
iii. Tin
ferric oxide and aluminium.
d. Electrolysis of alumina is done.
4. Explain the terms.
e. Zinc oxide is dissolved in dilute
a. Metallurgy 		 b. Ores
hydrochloric acid.
c. Minerals
d. Gangue.
10. Complete the following statement
5. Write scientific reasons.
using every given options.
a. Lemon or tamarind is used for
During the extraction of 			
cleaning copper
vessels
turned
		aluminium…………..
greenish.
a. Ingredients and gangue in bauxite.
b. Generally the ionic compounds have
b. Use of leaching during the
high melting points.
concentration of ore.
c. Sodium is always kept in kerosene.
c. Chemical reaction of transformation
d. Pine oil is used in froth flotation.
of bauxite into alumina by Hall’s
e. Anodes need to be replaced from time
process.
to time during the electrolysis of
d. Heating the aluminium ore with
alumina.
concentrated caustic soda.
6. When a copper coin is dipped in
11. Divide the metals Cu, Zn, Ca, Mg, Fe,
silver nitrate solution, a glitter
Na, Li into three groups, namely
appears on the coin after some time.
reactive metals, moderately reactive
Why does this happen? Write the
metals and less reactive metals.
chemical equation.
`
7. The electronic configuration of metal
Project:
‘A’ is 2,8,1 and that of metal ‘B’ is
Collect metal vessels and various
2,8,2. Which of the two metals is
metal articles. Write detailed
more reactive? Write their reaction
information. Write the steps in the
with dilute hydrochloric acid.
procedure that can be done in the
laboratory for giving glitter to these.
8. Draw a neat labelled diagram.
Seek guidance from your teacher.
a. Magnetic separation method.
b. Froth floatation method.
²²²
c. Electrolytic reduction of alumina.
d. Hydraulic separation method.

109

9. Carbon Compounds
Ø Bonds in carbon compounds
Ø Carbon : A Versatile Element
Ø Hydrocarbons, Functional Groups and
Ø Nomenclature of Carbon
homologous series		
		
compounds
Ø Chemical Properties of Carbon Compounds Ø Macromolecules and Polymers

Can you recall?

1. What are the types of compounds ?

2. Objects in everyday use such as foodstuff, fibers, paper, medicines, wood, fuels, are made
of various compounds. Which constituent elements are common in these compounds?
3. To which group in the periodic table does the element carbon belongs ? Write down the
electronic configuration of carbon and deduce the valency of carbon.
In the previous standards we have seen that organic and inorganic compounds are the
two important types of compounds. Except materials fabricated from metal and glass/soil
several other materials from foodstuff to fuels are made up of organic compounds. The
essential element in all the organic compounds is carbon. About 200 years back it was
believed that organic compounds are obtained directly or indirectly from the organisms.
However, after synthesis of the organic compound urea from an inorganic compounds in the
laboratory, the organic compounds received a new identity as carbon compounds. All the
compounds having carbon as a constituent element are called as organic compounds. The
compounds carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, carbide salts, carbonate salts and bicarbonate
salts are exception; they are inorganic compounds of carbon.
Bonds in Carbon compounds
You have learnt about the ionic compounds in the previous chapter. You have seen that
ionic compounds have high melting and boiling points and they conduct electricity in the molten
and dissolved state. You have also seen that these properties of ionic compounds are explained
on the basis of the ionic bonds in them. The table 9.1 shows melting and boiling points of a few
carbon compounds. Are these values higher or lower as compared to the ionic compounds?
Generally the melting and boiling
points of carbon compounds are found to
Melting point Boiling point
Compound
be lower than 300 0C. From this we
0
0
C
C
understood that the intermolecular
Methane (CH )
- 183
- 162
attractive forces are weak in carbon Ethanol (CH CH 4OH)
117
78
3
2
compounds.
Chloroform (CHCl3)
- 64
61
In the previous standard on testing Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
17
118
the electrical conductivity of carbon
compounds, glucose and urea you have 9.1 Melting and Boiling Points of a few carbon
compounds
observed that they are not electrical
conductors. Generally most of the carbon
Can you tell?
compounds are found to be bad conductors
of electricity. From it we understand that 1. What is meant by a chemical bond?
structures of most of the carbon compounds 2. What is the number of chemical bonds that an
lack ionic bonds. It means that the
atom of an element forms called?
chemical bonds in carbon compounds do 3. What are the two important types of chemical
bonds?
not produce ions.

110

In the previous standards you have learnt about the relationship between electronic
configuration and valency of an element, and also about the ionic and covalent bonds. Let see
at the background of electronic configuration of carbon and the covalent bonds formed. (See
Table 9.2).
Carbon
atom

Electronic
Configuration

Number of electron in the
Valence shell

C

2, 4

4

6

Most nearby noble gas and the
electronic configuration
He
Ne
2
2,8

9.2 Background of bond formation by carbon

You have seen that the driving force behind the formation of bond by an atom is to attain
the stable electronic configuration of the nearby noble gas and obtain stability. As the valence
shell of carbon contains 4 electrons, there can be many alternative routes to attain a noble gas
configuration.
(i) To attain the configuration of noble gas helium (He) by losing one after another all the
four valence electrons : In this method the net positive charge on the carbon atom goes on
increasing during loss of every electrons. Therefore to lose the next electron more energy is
required, which makes the task more difficult. Moreover, the C4+ cation that would ultimately
form in this process becomes unstable in spite of its noble gas configuration, because it has a
small size with high net charge. Therefore carbon atom does not take this route to attain a
noble gas configuration.
(ii) To attain the stable configuration of the noble gas neon (Ne) by accepting one by one
ass the four electrons in the valence shell. In this method the net negative charge on the
carbon atom goes on increasing while accepting every new electron. Therefore, more energy
is required for accepting the next electron by overcoming the increasing repulsive force making
the task more and more difficult. Moreover the C4- anion ultimately formed would be unstable
in spite of its noble gas configuration, as it would have a small size with high net charge
making it difficult for the nuclear charge +6 to hold 10 electrons around it. Therefore, carbon
atom does not take this route to attain a noble gas configuration.
(iii) To attain the configuration of neon by sharing four electrons of valence shell with
four valence electrons of other atoms: In this method two atoms share valence electrons with
each other. Valence shells of both the atoms overlap and accommodate the shared electrons,
As a result, both the atoms attain a noble gas configuration without generating any net charge
on them, which means that atoms remain electrically neutral. Due to these factors atoms
attain stability. Therefore, carbon atom adopts this route to attain a noble gas configuration.
The chemical bond formed by sharing of two valence electrons between the two atoms is
called covalent bond.
A covalent bond is represented clearly by drawing an electron - dot structure. In this
method a circle is drawn around the atomic symbol and each of the valence electrons is
indicated by a dot or a cross. The covalent bond formed between the atoms is indicated by
showing the circles around the atomic symbols crossing each other. The shared electrons are
shown in the overlapping regions of the two circles by dot or cross. The electron - dot structure
is also drawn without showing the circle. One pair of shared electrons constitutes one covalent
bond . A covalent bond is also represented by a small line joining the symbols of the two
atoms. The line structure is also called structural formula.
Single bond

H:H
9.3 Electron dot structure and line structure of hydrogen molecule with a single bond

111

Let us first look at the hydrogen molecule which is the simplest example of a molecule
formed by covalent bonding. You have already learnt that the atomic number of hydrogen
being 1, its atom contains 1 electron in K shell. It requires one more electron to complete the
K shell and attain the configuration of helium (He). To meet this requirement two hydrogen
atoms share their electrons with each other to form H2 molecule. One covalent bond, that is a
single bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms by sharing of two electrons. (see fig 9.3).
The O2 molecule is formed by chemical combination of two oxygen atoms; and N2
molecule is formed by the chemical combination of two nitrogen atoms. On drawing the
electron-dot structures of these two molecules, it becomes clear that the two oxygen atoms in
O2 molecule are joined with each other by two covalent bonds, that is, a double bond, while
the two nitrogen atoms in the N2 molecule are joined with each other by three covalent bonds,
that is, a triple bond (See figure 9.4) (Remember that it is esseantial to show all the valance
electrons in an electron dot structure.)

: :
: :
::

..

..

..

double bond

..

Two atoms of
oxygen

triple bond

9.4 Double Bond and Triple Bond

Use your brain power !
1. Atomic number of chlorine is 17.
What is the number of electron in the
valence shell of chlorine?
2. Molecular formula of chlorine is Cl2.
Draw electron-dot and line structure of
a chlorine molecule.
3. The molecular formula of water is H2O.
Draw electron-dot and line structures
for this triatomic molecule. (Use dots
for electron of oxygen atom and
crosses for electrons of hydrogen
atoms.)
4. The molecular formula of ammonia is
NH3. Draw electron-dot and line
structures for ammonia molecule.

Now let us consider a carbon compound
methane (CH4). You have learnt about the
occurrence, properties and uses of methane
molecule in the previous standard. Just now we
saw that carbon atom forms four covalent bonds
using the four valence electrons and attain the
configuration of the nearby noble gas neon (Ne)
and obtains stability: Fig 9.5 shows the line
structure and also the electron-dot structure of
methane.

Do you know ?
To understand the structures of carbon
compounds various types of molecular
models are used. The fig 9.6 shows ball and
stick model and space filling model of
methane molecule.

Use your brain power !
1. The molecular formula of carbon dioxide is CO2. Draw the electron-dot structure (without
showing circle) and line structure for CO2.
2. With which bond C atom in CO2 is bonded to each of the O atoms?
3. The molecular formula of sulphur is S8 in which eight sulphur atoms are bonded to each
other to form one ring. Draw an electron-dot structure for S8 without showing the circles.

112

four hydrogen
atoms and one
carbon atom

covalent
bond

methane
molecule
9.5 Electron-dot structure and line structure of methane molecule

Carbon : A Versatile Element
We saw that carbon atoms, like some
other atoms, share the valence electrons to
form covalent bonds. Similarly, we also
saw the structure of the simple carbon
compound, methane. But carbon is different
than the other elements; the number of
compounds formed from carbon is
extremely large. In the beginning we saw
that except for the objects formed from
metals and glass/soil all the other objects
are made from carbon. In short, brief the
entire living kingdom is made from carbon,
our body is also made from carbon.
Millions of molecules ranging from the
small and simple methane molecule to the
extremely big D.N.A. molecule are made
from carbon. The molecular masses of
carbon compounds range up to 1012. This
means that carbon atoms come together in
a large number to form extremely big
molecules. What is the cause of this unique
property of carbon? It is due to the peculiar
nature of the covalent bonds formed by
carbon, it can form large number of
compounds. From this we come to know
the following characteristics of carbon.
a. Carbon has a unique ability to form
strong covalent bonds with other carbon
atoms; this results in formation of big
molecules. This property of carbon is called
catenation power. The carbon compounds
contain open chains or closed chains of
carbon atoms. An open chain can be a
straight chain or a branched chain. A closed
chain is a ring structure. The covalent bond
between two carbon atoms is strong and
therefore stable. Due to the strong and
stable covalent bonds carbon is bestowed
with catenation power. 		

Space filling model

Ball & stick
model
9.6 Models of methane molecule

Till now the number of known
carbon compounds is about 10
million. This number is larger than
the total number of compounds
formed by all the other elements. The
range of molecular masses of carbon
compounds is 101 - 1012.
(See table 9.7)

Use your brain power !
1. Hydrogen peroxide decomposes
on its own by the following
reaction
H-O-O-H

2H-O-H + O2

From this, what will be your
inference about the strength of
O-O covalent bond?
2. Tell from the above example
whether oxygen has catenation
power or not.

113

Carbon Compound
Molecular mass
16
Methane CH4 (The smallest carbon compound)		
Cooking gas (C3H8 + C4 H10)		44/58
Benzene ( C6 H6)		78
Camphor (C10H16O)		152
Penicillin (C16H18N2O4S)		334
Sugar (C12H22O11)		342
Sodium dodecyl benzene sulphate (a detergent) 347
Fat 			
~ 700
Starch		
~ 103
Cellulose		
~ 105
Protein		
~ 105
Polyethylene		
~ 106
D.N.A.		
~ 1012

b. Two carbon atoms can be
bonded together by one, two
or three covalent bonds.
These are called single bond,
double bond, and triple bond
respectively. Due to the
ability of carbon atoms to
form multiple bonds as well
as single bonds, the number
of
carbon
compounds
increases. For example,
there are three compounds,
namely, ethane (CH3-CH3),
ethene (CH2=CH2) and
ethyne (CH º CH) which
contain two carbon atoms.

9.7 Carbon compounds and molecular masses

c. Being tetravalent one carbon atom can form bonds with four other atoms (carbon or any
other). This results in formation of many compounds. These compounds possess different
properties as per the atoms to which carbon is bonded. For example, five different
compounds are formed using one carbon atom and two monovalent elements hydrogen
and chlorine : CH4, CH3Cl, CH2Cl2, CHCl3, CCl4. Similarly carbon atoms form covalent
bonds with atoms of elements like O, N, S, halogen & P to form different types of carbon
compounds in large number.
d. Carbon has one more characteristic which is responsible for large number of carbon
compounds. It is ‘isomerism’. Shortly, we will learn about it.
Hydrocarbons : Saturated and Unsaturated
Carbon compounds contain many elements. The element hydrogen is present to a
smaller or larger extent in majority of carbon compounds. The compounds which contain
carbon and hydrogen as the only two elements are called hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons are
the simplest and the fundamental organic compounds. The smallest hydrocarbon is
methane (CH4) formed by combination of one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms. We
have already seen the structure of methane. Ethane is one more hydrocarbon. Its molecular
formula is C2H6. The first step in writing the line structure (structural formula) of a
hydrocarbon is to join the carbon atoms in the molecule with single bonds, and then in the
second step use the hydrogen atoms in the molecular formula so as to fulfil the remaining
valencies of the tetravalent carbon atoms. (See fig. 9.8), Fig. 9.9 shows electron-dot
structure using two methods.
Ethane : Molecular formula C2H6
Step 1 : Join the two carbon atoms with single bonds C - C
Step 2 : Use the 6 hydrogen atoms in the molecular formula
for fulfilling the tetravalency of both the carbon atoms.

9.8 Line structure / structural formula of ethane

9.9. Electron-dot structure of ethane

114

Molecular formula of propane is C3H8 . From this draw
its structural formula.
From the structural formula of ethane & propane it is seen that the valencies of all the
atoms are satisfied by the single bonds. Such compounds are called saturated compounds.
Ethane & propane are saturated hydrocarbons. Saturated hydrocarbons are also called
‘Alkanes’ .
There are two more hydrocarbons that contain two carbon atoms, namely, ethene
(C2H4) and ethyne(C2H2). Let us see the method to draw the structural formula (line
structure) of ethene (C2H4). (Fig 9.10)
Step 1 : Join the two carbon atoms with single bond C-C.
Step 2 : Use the 4 hydrogen atoms in the molecular formula for satisfying tetravalency of
both the carbon atoms.

Use your brain power !

Step 3: Satisfy the tetravalency of
the two carbon atoms by drawing
a double bond in place of the
single bond between them.
9.10 Line structure/ structural formula

H H
C :: C
H H

: :
: :

It appears that one valency of
each of the two carbon atoms is
not satisfied.

9.11 Electron-dot structures
of ethane

1. The molecular formula ethyne is C2H2. From this draw
Use your brain power !
its structural formula and electron - dot structure.
2. How many bonds have to be there in between the two
carbon atoms in ethyne so as to satisfy their tetravalency?
The carbon compounds having a double bond or triple bond between two carbon atoms
are called unsaturated compounds. Ethene and ethyne are unsaturated hydrocarbons. The
unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double bond are called ‘Alkenes’. The
unsaturated hydrocarbons whose structures contain a carbon-carbon triple bond are called
‘Alkynes’. Generally the unsaturated compounds are more reactive than the saturated
compounds.
Straight chains, Branched chains and Rings of Carbon atoms
Let us compare the structural formulae of methane, ethane and propane. From these
structural formulae it is seen that the carbon atom (single or more carbon atoms bonded to
each other) lie in the core of the molecule, while the hydrogen atoms bonded to each of the
carbon atoms are on the periphery of the molecule. The mutually bonded carbon atoms in the
core are like the skeleton of the molecule. The carbon skeleton determines the shape of the
molecule of a carbon compound.
A straight chain of carbon atoms is formed by joining the carbon atoms are next to the
other. The first column of the table 9.12 shows straight chains of carbon atoms. Write the
structural formulae of the corresponding straight chain hydrocarbons in the second column
satisfying the tetravalency of the carbon atom by joining them to hydrogen atoms. Work out
the molecular formula from this and write it down in the third column. The name of the
hydrocarbon is given in the fourth column.

115

Straight chain of carbon Structural Molecular
Name
atoms
formula
formula
H
CH4
C
Methane

Do you know ?

- -

In the course of millions of
years the reserves of crude oil
were formed from the dead
C-C
Ethane
organisms buried under the sea
C-C-C
Propane
floor. This crude oil and natural
C-C-C-C
Butane
gas are now recovered from
C-C-C-C-C
Pentane the oil wells. The natural gas is
mainly methane . The crude oil
C-C-C-C-C-C
Hexane
is a complex mixture of
C-C-C-C-C-C-C
Heptane thousands
of
different
C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C
Octane
compounds. It mainly contains
various hydrocarbons. Various
C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C
Nonane
useful components such as
C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C
Decane
CNG, LPG, petrol (gasoline),
9.12 Straight chain hydrocarbon
kerosene, diesel, engine oil,
Now let us pay more attention to the carbon chain in lubricant, etc. are obtained by
butane. The four carbon atoms can be joined to form a separation crude oil using
carbon chain in yet another way. (See fig 9.13 a)
fractional distillation.
C
H-C-H
H

C
C

C

C
C

C
C

(i)

C

(ii)

a. Two possible carbon chains

b. Two structural formulae for
the molecular formula C4 H10

9.13 Two isomeric compounds with molecular formula C4 H10

Two different structural formulae are obtained on joining hydrogen atoms to these
two chains so as to satisfy the tetravalency of the carbon atoms. The molecular formula of
both these structural formulae is the same which is C4H10. These are two different
compounds as their structural formulae are different. The phenomenon in which compounds
having different structural formulae have the same molecular formula is called ‘structural
isomerism’. The number of carbon compounds increases further due to the isomerism
observed in carbon compounds. The carbon chain (i) in the figure 9.13 (a) is a straight
chain of carbon atoms, whereas the carbon chain (ii) is a branched chain of carbon atoms.
Apart from the straight chains and branched chains, closed chains of carbon atoms
are present in some carbon compounds. Where in rings of carbon atoms form. For example,
the molecular formula of cyclohexane is C6H12 and its structural formula contains a ring
of six carbon atoms. (See fig 9.14)
a. the carbon ring
in cyclohexane

b. Structural
formula of
cyclohexene

Use your brain power !
Draw electron-dot structure
of cyclohexane.

9.14 Ring Structure of Cyclohexane

116

All types of carbon compounds whether straight chain, branched chain or cyclic, can be
saturated or unsaturated. This is explained by the various examples of hydrocarbons in table 9.15
Saturated hydrocarbons
Unsaturated hydrocarbons
Straight
chain
hydrocarbons Propane
C 3 H8
Propene C3 H6
Branched
chain
isobutane
hydrocarbons C4 H10

Propyne C3 H4

isobutylene
C4 H 8

Cyclic
Cyclohexane
hydrocarbons
C6 H12

Cyclohexene
C6 H10

Cyclopentane
C5 H10

Benzene
C6 H 6

9.15 Various Types of Hydrocarbons

It is learnt from the structural formula of benzene that it is a cyclic unsaturated
hydrocarbon. There are three alternate double bonds in the six membered ring structure of
benzene. The compounds having this characteristic unit in their structure are called
aromatic compounds.
Functional Groups in Carbon Compounds
Till now you have learnt about the hydrocarbon compounds formed by combination
of the elements carbon and hydrogen. Many more types of carbon compounds are formed
by formation of bonds of carbon with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitrogen,
sulphur. The atoms of these elements substitute one or more hydrogen atoms in the
hydrocarbon chain and thereby the tetravalency of carbon is satisfied. The atom of the
element which is substitute for hydrogen is referred to as a hetero atom. Sometimes hetero
atoms are not alone but exist in the form of certain groups of atoms. (See the table 9.16).
The compound acquire specific chemical properties due to these hetero atoms or the
groups of atoms that contain heteroatoms, irrespective of the length and nature of the
carbon chain in that compound. Therefore these hetero atoms or the groups of atoms
containing hetero atoms are called functional groups. The table 9.16 shows a few functional
groups that occurs in carbon compounds.

117

=

Here the free valency of the functional group is indicated by a short line. The functional
group taking place of a hydrogen is joined to the carbon chain with this valency. The
carbon- carbon double and triple bonds are also recognised as functional groups as the
respective compounds get specific chemical properties due to them.
Functional Group
Hetero Atom
Condensed
Name
Structural formula
Structural formula
Halogen (chlorine, Halo
-X (-C1, -Br, -I)
- X (-C1, -Br, -I)
bromine, iodine)
(chromo/ bromo / iodo)
Oxygen
1. Alcohol
-O-H
-OH
O
-CHO
2. Aldehyde
-C-H
O
-CO3. Ketone
-CO
-COOH
4. Carboxylic Acid
-C-O-H
-O-O5. Ether
O
-COO6. Ester
-C-O-N-H
Nitrogen
Amines
- NH2
H
=

=

=

9.16 Some functional groups in carbon compounds

Homologous series
You have seen that chains of different length are formed by joining the carbon atoms
to each other. Moreover you have also seen that a functional group can take place of a
hydrogen atom on these chains. As a result of this, large number of compounds are formed
having the same functional groups but different length of carbon chain. For example, there
are many compounds such as CH3-OH, CH3-CH2-OH, CH3-CH2-CH2-OH, CH3-CH2-CH2CH2-OH which contain alcohol as the functional group. Though the length of the carbon
chains in them is different, their chemical properties are very much similar due to the
presence of the same functional group in them. The series of compounds formed by joining
the same functional group in the place of a particular hydrogen atom on the chains having
sequentially increasing length is called homologous series. There are different homologous
series in accordance with the functional group. For example, homologous series of alcohols,
homologous series of carboxylic acids, homologous series of aldehydes, etc. All the
members of the homologous series are homologues of each other. Earlier you filled the
structural formulae and molecular formulae in the table 9.12. From that the initial part of
the homologous series of alkanes was formed.
Let us understand the characteristics of homologous series by considering initial parts
of homologous series of alkanes, alkenes and alcohols. (See table No. 9.17.)

Complete the table Fill in the gaps in the table 9.17 a, b and c of homologous
series.

118

a. Homologous Series of Alkanes
Number of
Condensed Structural formula
carbon
atoms

Number of
-CH2units

Boiling
point 0C

1

1

- 162

CH3-CH3

2

2

- 88.5

C3H8

CH3-CH2-CH3

3

3

- 42

Butane

C4H10

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH3

...

...

0

Pentane

C5H12

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH3

...

...

36

Hexane

C6H14

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH3

...

...

69

Name

Molecular
formula

Methane

CH4

CH4

Ethane

C2H6

Propane

b. Homologous Series of Alcohols
Name

Molecular
formula

Condensed Structural formula

Number of
carbon
atoms

Number of
-CH2units

Boiling
point 0C

Methanol

CH4O

CH3-OH

1

1

63

Ethanol

C2H6O

CH3-CH2-OH

2

2

78

Propanol

C3H8O

CH3-CH2-CH2-OH

...

...

97

Butanol

C4H10O

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-OH

...

...

118

Number of
-CH2units

Boiling
point 0C

c. Homologous Series of Alkenes
Name

Molecular
formula

Condensed Structural formula

Number of
carbon
atoms

Ethene

C2H4

CH2= CH2

2

0

- 102

Propene

C3H6

CH3-CH=CH2

3

1

- 48

1-Butene

C4H8

CH3-CH2-CH=CH2

...

...

- 6.5

1-Pentene

C5H10

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH=CH2

...

...

30

9.17 Some Homologous Series

Use your brain power !
1. By how many -CH2- (methylene) units do the formulae of the first two members of homologous
series of alkanes, methane (CH4) and ethane (C2H6) differ? Similarly, by how many - CH2units do the neighbouring members ethane (C2H6) and propane (C3H8) differ from each other?
2. How many methylene units are extra in the formula of the fourth member than the third
member of the homologous series of alcohols?
3. How many methylene units are less in the formula of the second member than the third
member of the homologous series of alkenes?

119

You have found that in any homologous series while going in an increasing order of the
length of the carbon chain, every time one methylene unit (-CH2-) goes on increasing. Therefore,
while going in an increasing order of the length there is a rise in the molecular mass of the
members by 14 u.
Inspection of the table 9.17 (a), (b) and (c) will reveal one more point to you, and that is
gradation in the boiling points. Boiling point is a physical property of a compound. Generally it
is found that, while going in an increasing order in any homologous series the physical properties
show variation in one direction, that is, a gradation is observed in the physical properties.
1. The table 9.17 (c) shows the homologous series of alkenes.
Inspect the molecular formulae of the members of this series.
Do you find any relationship, in the number of carbon atoms
and the number of hydrogen atoms in the molecular formulae?
2. If the number of carbon atoms in the molecular formulae of alkenes is denoted by ‘n’ , what
will be the number of hydrogen atoms?
Use your brain power !

The molecular formulae of the members of the homologous series of alkenes can be
represented by a general formula CnH2n. When the value of ‘n’ is ‘2’. We get the molecular
formula of the first member of this series as C2 H2x2 , that is, C2H4. When the value of ‘n’ is ‘3’,
the molecular formula of the second member of the alkene series is obtained as C3H2x3, that is,
C3H6.
1. What would be the general formula for the molecular formulae of the members of the
homologous series of alkanes? What would be the value of ‘n’ for the first member of this
series?
2. The general molecular formula for the homologous series of alkynes is CnH2n-2 .Write
down the individual molecular formulae of the first, second and third members by substituting
the values 2,3 and 4 respectively for ‘n’ in this formula. From the above examples we come to
know the following characteristics of the homologous series.
(i) While going from one member to the next in a homologous series.
(a) One methylene (-CH2-) unit gets added. (b) molecular mass increases by 14 u.
(c) number of carbon atoms increases by one.
(ii) Chemical properties of members of a homologous series show similarity.
(iii) All the members of a homologous series can be represented by The same a general molecular
formula.
1.Write down structural formulae of the first four
members of the various homologous series formed by
making use of the functional groups in the table 9.16
Use your brain power !
2. General formula of the homologous series of alkanes
is CnH2n+2. Write down the molecular formula of the
8th and 12th member using this.
Nomenclature systems of carbon compounds
a. System of common names : We have seen that today millions of carbon compounds are
known. Initially when the number of known carbon compounds was small, scientists named
them in a variety of ways. Now those names are called common names. For example, the
sources of the names of the first four alkanes, namely methane, ethane, propane and butane
are different. The names of the alkanes thereafter were given from number of carbon atoms
in them. Two isomeric compounds having a straight chain or branched chain in their
structural formulae are possible for the molecular formula C4H10. the difference and
interrelationship in them was indicated by naming them as n-butane (normal-butane) and
i- butane (iso-butane).

120

1. Draw three structural formulae having molecular
formula C5H12 .
Use your brain power ! 2. Give the names n-pentane, 1(i-pentane) and neopentane to the above three structural formulae.
(Use the same logic as used in the names of the
isomeric butanes for this purpose.)
3. Draw all the possible structural formulae having molecular formula C6H14 . Give
names to all the isomers. Which difficulties were faced by you while naming?
As the time progressed, the carbon compounds became very large in number and their
common names caused confusion. A need was felt to have a logical system acceptable
to all for naming the carbon compounds.
IUPAC nomenclature system
International Union for Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) put forth a nomenclature
system based on the structure of the compounds, and it was accepted all over the world.
There is a provision in this system for giving a unique name to all the carbon compounds.
Let us see how some straight chain compounds containing one functional group are given
IUPAC names and let us also see their common names.
There are three units in the IUPAC name of any carbon compound : parent, suffix and
prefix. These are arranged in the name as follows
prefix - parent - suffix
An IUPAC name is given to a compound on the basis of the name of its parent alkane. The
name of the compound in constructed by attaching appropriate suffix and prefix to the name of the
parent alkane. The steps in the IUPAC nomenclature of straight chain compounds are as follows.
Step 1 : Draw the structural formula of the straight chain compound and count the number of
carbon atoms in it. The alkane with the same number of carbon atoms is the parent alkane of the
concerned compound. Write the name of this alkane. In case the carbon chain of the concerned
compound contains a double bond, change the ending of the parent name from ‘ane’ to ‘ene’. If
the carbon chain in the concerned compound contains a triple bond, change the ending of the parent
name from ‘ane’ to ‘yne’. (See the table 9.18)
Sr.No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Structural formula
CH3-CH2-CH3
CH3-CH2-OH
CH3-CH2-COOH
CH3-CH2-CH2- CHO
CH3-CH=CH2
CH3-C = CH

Straight chain
C-C-C
C-C
C-C-C
C-C-C-C
C-C=C
C-C = C

Parent name
propane
ethane
propane
butane
propene
propyne

9.18 IUPAC Nomenclature of straight chain compounds: step 1
Step 2: If the structural formula contains a functional group replace the last letter ‘e’ from the parent
name by the condensed name of the functional group as the suffix. (Exception : The condensed
name of the functional group ‘halogen’ is always attached as the prefix.) (see the table 9.19)
Step 3: Number the carbon atoms in the carbon chain from one end to the other. Assign the number
‘1’ to carbon in the functional group -CHO or -COOH, if present, Otherwise, the chain can be
numbered in two directions. Accept that numbering which gives smaller number to the carbon
carrying the functional group. In the final name a digit (number) and a character (letter) should be
separated by a small horizontal line (See the table 9.20) (Usually numbering is not required if the
carbon chain contain only two carbon atoms)

121

Sr.
No

Structural
formula

Functional group
(Condensed name)

Parent
name

parent-suffix

prefix-parent

1

CH2-CH2-OH

- OH (ol)

ethane

ethanol

-

2

CH3-CH2-Cl

- C1 (chloro)

ethane

-

chloroethane

3

Br-CH2-CH3

-Br (bromo)

ethane

-

bromoethane

4

CH3-CH2-CHO

- CHO (al)

propane

propanal

-

5

CH3-COOH

- COOH (oic acid)

ethane

ethanoic acid

-

6

CH3-NH2

- NH2 (amine)

methane

methanamine

-

7

CH3 - CO - CH3

- CO- (one)

propane

propanone

-

9.19 IUPAC Nomenclature : Step- 2
Sr.
No
1.

Two numberings of the
carbon chain
C1-C2 -C3
OH
C3-C2 -C1
OH

Structural formula
CH3-CH-CH3
OH

Acceptable
numbering
Both the
numberings
equivalent

IUPAC name of
the compound
propan-2-ol

C1-C2 -C3 C4-C5
2.

CH3-CH2-CH2-CH-CH3

Cl
C5-C4 -C3- C2-C1

Cl

Cl
O
O
3.

2 - chloropentane

O

C1-C2-C3-C4-C5

CH3- C-CH2-CH2-CH3

C5-C4 -C3- C2-C1
Cl

C1-C2-C3-C4-C5

O

pentan-2-one

C5-C4-C3-C2-C1
9.20 IUPAC Nomenclature : Step- 3

Some more steps are required for writing IUPAC names of compounds having more
complex structural units such as branched chains, carbon rings, heterocycles, etc. Study of
these will be included in the further standards. At the same time, also keep in mind that
there is a practice of using common names of the carbon compounds which are frequently
use in the laboratory.
Complete the table

The table 9.19 shows common names and
structural formulae of a few carbon compounds.
Complete the table by writing their IUPAC names in
the third column.

122

Sr.
No.

Common name

Structural formula

1

ethylene

CH2=CH2

2

acetylene

HC º CH

3

acetic acid

CH3-COOH

4

methyl alcohol

CH3-OH

5

ethyl alcohol

CH3-CH2-OH

6

acetaldehyde

CH3-CHO

7

acetone

CH3-CO-CH3

8

ethyl methyl ketone

CH3-CO-CH2- CH3

9

ethyl amine

CH3-CH2-NH2

10

n-propyl chloride

CH3- CH-CH2-Cl

IUPAC Name

9.21 Common and IUPAC names of some carbon compounds

Chemical Properties of Carbon Compounds

Can you recall?

1. Which is the component of biogas that makes it
useful as fuel?
2. Which product is formed by the combustion of
elemental carbon?
3. Is the biogas combustion reaction endothermic or
exothermic?

1. Combustion : Let us first look at combustion as a chemical property of carbon
compounds. We have seen in the previous standard that, carbon in the form of various
allotropes on ignition in presence of oxygen undergoes combustion to emit heat and light,
and forms carbon dioxide. Hydrocarbons as well as most of the carbon compounds under
goes combustion in presence of oxygen to emit heat and light and form carbon dioxide and
water as the common products. Some of the combustion reactions are as follows.
(i) C + O2 ® CO2 + heat + light
(Carbon)
(ii) CH4 + 2O2 ® CO2 + 2H2O + heat + light
(methane)
(iii) CH3- CH2- OH + 3O2 ® 2CO2 + 3H2O + heat + light
(Ethanol)

Use your brain power !

Propane (C3H8) is one of the combustible component
of L.P.G. Write down the reaction for complete
combustion of Propane (C3H8)

123

Apparatus : Bunsen burner, copper gauze, metal plate, etc.
Chemicals : Ethanol, acetic acid, naphthalene
Procedure : Place one of the above chemicals (3-4 drops or a pinch) on a clean copper
gauze at room temperature, hold it on a blue flame of the Bunsen burner and observe. Is
smoke/ soot seen to form due to combustion? Hold the metal plate on the flame when the
substance is undergoing combustion. Does any deposit get collected on the plate? Which
colour? Repeat the same procedure using other chemicals from the above list.
In the above activity ethanol is a saturated carbon compound, while naphthalene is an
unsaturated compound. Generally saturated carbon compounds burn with a clean blue flame
while unsaturated carbon compounds burn with a yellow flame and release black smoke. It
is this black smoke due to which a deposit of black soot got collected on the metal plate.
Comparison of the molecular formulae indicates that
the proportion of carbon is larger in unsaturated
compounds than in saturated compounds. As a result,
Compare
some unburnt carbon particles are also formed during
The proportion of carbon
combustion of unsaturated compounds. While in the
atoms in ethanol (C2H5OH)
flame, these hot carbon particles emit yellow light and
therefore the flame appears yellow. However, if oxygen
and naphthalene (C10H8)
supply is limited a yellow flame is obtained by combustion
of saturated compounds as well.
Try this.

Try this.
2. Oxidation

Light a Bunsen burner. Open and close the air hole at the bottom
of the burner by means of the movable ring around it. When do you
get yellow sooty flame? When do you get blue flame?

You have seen that carbon compounds start
burning by combining easily with oxygen in the
air when ignited in air. In this process of
combustion all the chemical bonds in the molecule
of the carbon compound break and CO2 and H2O
are formed as the products. In other words the
carbon compounds is completely oxidised during
combustion. Chemical compounds can also be
used as source of oxygen. Substances that can
give oxygen to other substances are called
oxidants or oxidizing agents. Potassium
permanganate or potassium dichromate are
commonly used as oxidizing agents. An oxidising
agents affects on certain functional groups in
present carbon compounds.

Always remember
There are inlets for air in the
gas or kerosene stove at home. It is
because of these air inlets that the
gaseous fuel is mixed with sufficient
oxygen and a clean blue flame is
obtained. In case there is deposition
of black soot on the bottom of
cooking vessels it is an indication
of choking of the air inlets and
thereby the wastage of fuel. In such
case the air inlets of the stove
should be got cleaned.

Apparatus : Test tube, Bunsen burner, measuring cylinder, dropper, etc.
Chemicals : Ethanol, dilute solution of sodium carbonate, dilute
solution of potassium permanganate.
Procedure : Take 2-3 ml ethanol in a test tube, add 5 ml sodium carbonate solution to it and warm
the mixture by holding the test tube on the burner for a while. Do dropwise addition of a dilute
solution of potassium permanganate to this warm mixture with stirring. Does the typical pink
colour of potassium permanganate stay as it is on addition ? Does the pink colour stop vanishing
and stays on after some time of the addition process?

Try this.

124

In the above activity ethanol gets oxidised by alkaline potassium permanganate to
form ethanoic acid. Only certain bonds in the vicinity of the functional group take part in
this reaction. The following equation will explain this.
Compare

O
CH3 - CH2 - OH

(O)
alkaline KMnO4

(ethanol) 		

CH3 - C - OH
(ethanoic acid)

How is the transformation of
ethanol into ethanoic acid an
oxidation reaction?

On adding the pink coloured solution of potassium permanganate to ethanol, the pink
colour disappears in the beginning. This is because potassium permanganate is used up in
the oxidation reaction. At a certain point of the addition, oxidation of all the quantity of
ethanol in the test tube is complete. If the addition of potassium permangnate is continued
beyond this point, it is not used up and becomes excess. The pink colour of this excess
potassium permangnate does not vanish but stays as it is.
3. Addition Reaction

Try this.

Apparatus : Test tubes, droppers, etc.

Chemicals : Tincture iodine, bromine water, liquefied Vanaspati ghee, various vegetable
oils (peanut, safflower, sunflower, olive, etc.)
Procedure : Take 4 ml oil in a test tube and add 4 drops of tincture iodine or bromine
water in it. Shake the test tube. Find out whether the original colour of bromine or iodine
disappears or not. Repeat the same procedure using other oils and Vanaspati ghee.
In the above activity, the observation of the disappearing /diminishing colour of
bromine / iodine indicates that bromine / iodine is used up. This means that bromine/
iodine has undergone a reaction with the concerned substance. This reaction is an ‘addition
reaction’. When a carbon compound combines with another compound to form a product
that contain all the atoms in both the reactants, it is called an addition reaction. Unsaturated
compounds contains a multiple bond as their functional group. They undergo addition
reaction to form a saturated compound as the product. The addition reaction of an
unsaturated compound with iodine or bromine takes place instantaneously at room
temperature. Moreover the colour change can be felt by eyes. therefore this reaction is
used as a test for detection of a multiple bond in a carbon compound. In the above activity,
the colour of iodine / bromine disappears in the reaction between an oil and iodine,
however, there is no colour change with Vanaspati ghee. What inference will you draw
from this? Which of the substances do contain a multiple bond?
9.22 Fatty Acids

Stearic acid

Molecular
Formula
C17 H35 COOH

Number of C=C
double bonds
...................................

Oleic acid

C17 H33 COOH

...................................

yes / no

Palmitic acid

C15 H31 COOH

..................................

yes / no

Linoleic acid

C17 H31 COOH

.................................

yes / no

Name

125

Will it decolourize I2?
yes / no

The unsaturated compound can also undergo addition reaction with hydrogen to form
a saturated compound. However, it is necessary to use a catalyst like platinum or nickel
for this reaction. We have already seen that catalyst is such a substance due to presence
of which rate of reaction changes without causing any disturbance to it.

- C = C-

H2
Pt/Ni

-C

C-

H H

This reaction is used for hydrogenation of
vegetable oils in presence of nickel catalyst. You
have seen in the above activity that iodine test
indicates presence of multiple bonds (double bond in
particular) in the molecules of oils while Vanaspati
ghee is found to be saturated. The molecules of
vegetable oil contain long and unsaturated carbon
chains. Hydrogenation
transforms them into
saturated chains and thereby Vanaspati ghee is
formed.

Unsaturated fats containing double bonds are healthy while saturated fats are harmful to health.
4. Substitution reaction
As the single bonds C-H and C-C are very strong, the saturated hydrocarbons are not
reactive, and therefore they remain inert in presence of most reagents. However, saturated
hydrocarbons, in presence of sunlight react rapidly with chlorine. In this reaction chlorine
atoms replace, one by one, all the hydrogen atoms in the saturated hydrocarbon. The
reaction in which the place of one type of atom / group in a reactant is taken by another
atom / group of atoms, is called substitution reaction. Chlorination of methane, is a
substitution reaction which gives four products.
CH4

Sunlight

+ Cl2		 CH3 - Cl + HCl
Sunlight

CH3Cl + Cl2		 CH2Cl2 + HCl
CH2Cl2 + Cl2

Sunlight

CHCl3 + HCl

Sunlight

CHCl3 + Cl2		 CCl4
+ HCl
Still larger number of products are formed in chlorination reaction of higher
homologues of alkanes.
In the chlorination, substitution reaction of propane
two isomeric products containing one chlorine atom are
Use your brain power !
obtained. Draw their structural formulae and give their
IUPAC names.
You have learnt about four types of common reactions in the previous chapter. In
which of these four types the addition and substitution reaction of carbon compounds can
be included? What are the additional details and difference in the addition and substitution reaction?

126

Important carbon compounds : Ethanol and Ethanoic Acid
Ethanol and ethanoic acid are two of the commercially important carbon compounds.
Let us now learn more about them.
At room temperature colourless ethanol is a liquid and its boiling point is 78 0C.
Generally ethanol is called alcohol or spirit. Ethanol is soluble in water in all proportions.
When aqueous solution of ethanol is tested with litmus paper it is found to be neutral.
Consumption of small quantity of dilute ethanol shows its effect, even though is condemned
still it has remained socially widespread practice. Consumption of alcohol harms health
in a number of ways. It adversely affects the physiological processes and the central
nervous system. Consumption of even a small quantity of pure ethanol (called absolute
alcohol) can be lethal. Ethanol being good solvent, it is used in medicines such as tincture
iodine (solution of iodine and ethanol), cough mixture and also in many tonics.
Do you know ?
Methanol (CH3OH), the lower
homologue of ethanol, is
poisonous, and intake of its
small quantity can affect
vision and at times can be
lethal. To prevent the misuse
of the important commercial
solvent ethanol, it is mixed
with the poisonous methanol.
Such ethanol is called
denatured spirit. A blue dye is
also added to it, so that it is
easily recognised.

Try this.

Chemical properties of ethanol
You have learnt about the oxidation reaction of
ethanol in a previous unit of this chapter. Two more
reactions of ethanol are as follows. The functional
group -OH plays an important role in the reactions
of ethanol.
(i) Reaction with sodium
2Na + 2 CH3-CH2- OH

2 CH3-CH2-ONa + H2
(Sodium ethoxide)

All the alcohols react with sodium metal to
liberate hydrogen gas and form sodium alkoxide
salts. In the reaction of ethanol with sodium metal,
hydrogen gas and sodium ethoxide are formed as
products.

Note : This activity should be demonstrated by the teacher.

Apparatus : Big test tube, delivery tube fitted in a rubber cork, knife, candle, etc.
Chemicals : Sodium metal, ethanol, magnesium ribbon, etc.
Procedure : Take 10 ml ethanol in a big test tube. Cut sodium metal into 2-3 pieces of a
cereal grain size. Put the sodium pieces into the ethanol in the test tube and fix the gas
delivery tube to the test tube. Take a burning candle near the outlet of the gas delivery tube
and observe.
1. Which is the combustible gas coming out of the gas delivery tube?
2. Why do the sodium pieces appear to dance on the surface of ethanol?
3. Repeat the above procedure using magnesium ribbon instead of sodium.
4. Do you see gas bubble released from the piece of magnesium ribbon?
5. Does magnesium metal react with ethanol?

127

In previous standard you have learnt that a moderately reactive metal such as
magnesium reacts with strong acid to liberate hydrogen gas. Though ethanol is neutral, it
reacts with sodium metal and liberates hydrogen gas. Sodium being highly reactive metal,
it reacts with the neutral functional group -OH of ethanol.
(ii) Dehydration reaction : When ethanol is heated at the temperature 170 0C with excess
amount of concentrated sulphuric acid, one molecule of water is removed from its molecule
to form ethene, an unsaturated compound.
1700C

CH2=CH2 + H2O Here, concentrated sulphuric acid acts as a
dehydrating agent.
conc. H2SO4

CH3-CH2-OH 		

1. Explain by writing a reaction, what will happen when pieces
Use your brain power ! of sodium metal are put in n- propyl alcohol.
2. Explain by writing a reaction, which product will be formed
on heating n - butyl alcohol with concentrated sulphuric acid.
Science box : Alcohol : A fuel
The sugarcane plant transforms solar energy into chemical energy very efficiently.
When molasses, obtained during production of sugar from sugarcane, is subjected to
fermentation, alcohol (ethanol) is obtained. On combustion in sufficient air ethanol
gives carbon dioxide and water as the only products. In this way, ethanol is a clean fuel.
Therefore in some countries it is used as an additive to increase the efficiency of petrol.
Such a fuel is called gasohol.
Ethanoic acid: Ethanoic acid is a colourless liquid with boiling point1180C. Ethanoic
acid is commonly known as acetic acid. Its aqueous solution is acidic and turns blue
litmus red. Vinegar, which is used as preservative in pickles, is a 5-8 % aqueous solution
of acetic acid. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid is 170C. As a result during winter
in cold countries ethanoic acid freezes at room temperature itself and looks like ice.
Therefore it is named ‘glacial acetic acid’.

Try this.

Apparatus: Glazed tile, glass rods, pH paper, blue litmus paper.
Chemicals : Dilute ethanoic acid, dilute hydrochloric acid

Procedure: Place two strips of blue litmus paper on a glazed tile. Put one drop of dilute
hydrochloric acid on one strip with the help of a glass rod. Put one drop dilute ethanoic
acid with the help of another glass rod on the other strip. Note the colour change taken
place in the litmus strip. Repeat the same procedure using strips of pH paper. Note all the
observation in the following table.
Colour change
in blue litmus
paper

Ethanoic acid

Corresponding pH
(Scratch the
unwanted)
<7/ 7 />7

Hydrochloric acid

< 7/ 7 />7

Substance

Colour change
seen on the pH
paper

9.23 Testing ethanoic acid & Hydrochloric acid

128

Corresponding
pH

Use your brain power !

1. Which one of ethanoic acid and hydrochloric acid is
stronger?
2. Which indicator paper out of blue litmus paper and
pH paper is useful to distinguish between ethanoic
acid and hydrochloric acid?

Chemical Properties of ethanoic Acid
Ethanoic acid contain carboxylic acid as its functional group. The chemical reaction
of ethanoic acid are mainly due to this functional group.
i. Reaction with base
a. A reaction with strong base
Ethanoic acid gives neutralization reaction with a strong base sodium hydroxide to
form a salt and water.
CH3-COOH + NaOH ® CH3-COO Na
(Acid)

(Base)

+ H 2O

(Salt)

(Water)

The IUPAC name of the salt formed here is sodium ethanoate while its common
name is sodium acetate. You have learnt in the previous standard that acetic acid is a
weak acid. Will the salt sodium acetate be neutral?
b. Reaction with carbonate and bicarbonate

Try this.

Apparatus : Big test tube, small test tube, bent gas delivery tube,
rubber cork, thistle funnel, stand, etc.

Chemicals : Acetic acid , sodium carbonate powder, freshly prepared lime water.
Procedure : Arrange the
apparatus as shown in figure.
Place sodium carbonate Thistle funnel
powder in the big test tube.
Stand
Pour 10 ml acetic acid through
Cork
the thistle funnel. Observe the
changes taking place in the
two test tubes.
1. Which gas does come out
as effervescence in the big
test tube?
2. Why are bubbles seen in
the small test tube ?
3. What is the colour change
in the lime water? Write
the related equation.

Big
test tube
Acetic
acid

Gas delivery tube
Small test tube

Freshly prepared
lime water
Sodium carbonate

9.24 Reaction of acetic acid and sodium carbonate

129

In this activity ethanoic acid reacts with the basic salt, namely, sodium carbonate, to
form a salt , named sodium ethanoate, water and carbon dioxide gas.
2CH3COOH (aq) + Na2CO3 (g) ­­­­® CH3COONa (aq) + H2O (l) + CO2 ­­­­(g)
The CO2 gas of the effervescence passes through the gas delivery tube and reacts with
the lime water in the small test tube. ‘Lime water turning milky’ is the test of carbon dioxide gas. If sodium bicarbonate is used instead of sodium carbonate in the above activity,
similar observation are obtained.
CH3COOH + NaHCO3 ­­­­® CH3COONa + H2O + CO2 ­­­­

Use your brain power !

1. Explain with reaction why does the lime water turn
milky in the above activity.
2. Explain the reaction that would take place when a
piece of sodium metal is dropped in ethanoic acid.

3. Two test tubes contain two colourless liquids ethanol and ethanoic acid. Explain by
writing reaction which chemical test you would perform to tell which substance is
present in which test tube.
ii. Esterification Reaction : Substances having ester as the functional group are formed
by reaction between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol.

Try this.
Apparatus : Test tube, beakers, burner etc.

Test tube

Chemicals : Glacial ethanoic acid, ethanol
concentrated sulphuric acid etc.
Beaker

Procedure : Take 1 ml ethanol and 1 ml
Water
glacial ethanoic acid in a test tube. Add a
few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid in
it. Keep this test tube in the beaker Mixture of
acid,
containing hot water (hot water bath) for ethanoic
ethanol and
five minutes. Then take 20-30 ml water in
conc.
another beaker and pour the above reaction sulphuric acid
mixture in it and smell it.

Wire gauze
Tripod
stand
Burner

Ethanoic acid reacts with ethanol in
presence of an acid catalyst and ester, ethyl
ethanoate is formed.
9.25 Esterification Reaction
Acid

CH3-COOH + CH3-CH2-OH ®CH3-COO-CH2-CH3 + H2O

(Ethanoic acid) (Ethanol)

Catalyst

130

(Ethyl Ethanoate)

(Water)

Esters have sweet odour. Majority of fruits owe their odour to a particular ester present
in them. Esters are used for making fragrances and flavouring agents. When an ester is
reacted with the alkali sodium hydroxide, the corresponding alcohol and carboxyclic acid
(in the form of its sodium salt) are obtained back. This reaction is called saponification
reaction, as it is used for preparation of soap from fats.
Ester + Sodium hydroxide ® Sodium Carboxylate + Alcohol

Use your brain power !

Macro molecules and Polymers
Can you tell?

When fat is heated with sodium hydroxide solution,
soap and glycerin are formed. Which functional groups
might be present in fat and glycerin? What do you
think?

1. What are the chemical names of the nutrients that we get from
the food stuffs namely cereals, pulses and meat?
2. What are the chemical substances that make cloth, furniture
and elastic objects?

Macromolecules : We have seen in the beginning of this chapter that the number of the
known carbon compounds is as large as about 10 million, and the range of their molecular
masses is as large as 101- 1012. The number of constituent atoms is very large for the
molecules with high molecular mass. The giant carbon molecules formed from hundreds
of thousands of atoms are called macromolecules. They are from the type of compounds
called polymers.
Natural macromolecules : The natural macromolecules namely, polysaccharides,
proteins and nucleic acids are the supporting pillars of the living world. We get food,
clothing and shelter from polysaccharides, namely, starch and cellulose. Proteins constitute
a large part of the bodies of animals and also are responsible for their movement and
various physiological processes. Nucleic acids control the heredity at molecular level.
Rubber is another type of natural macromolecule.
Manmade macromolecules : Macromolecules were produced for the first time in the
laboratory and factory with an intention to invent an alternative for rubber and silk. Today
manmade macromolecules are in use in every walk of life. Manmade fibres which have
strength along the length similar to natural fibres cotton, wool and silk; elastomers which
have the elastic property of rubber; plastics from which innumerable types of articles,
sheets, pipes and surface coatings are made are all examples of manmade macromolecules.
The structure of natural and manmade macromolecules is formed by joining several small
units in a regular manner. As a result the macromolecules are polymeric in nature.
Polymers : A macromolecule formed by regular repetition of a small unit is called polymer.
The small unit that repeats regularly to form a polymer is called monomer. The reaction
by which monomer molecules are converted into a polymer is called polymerization.
One important method of polymerization is to make a polymer by joining alkene type
monomers. For example, synthesis of polyethylene is as shown further (see 9.26). Also,
the table 9.27 shows the polymers used in large scale.

131

Polymerisation

ethylene monomer

Polyethylene

9.26 Synthesis of polyethylene

Name of
polymer
Polyethylene

Constituent
monomer
Ethylene
CH2= CH2

Polystyrene

Styrene
C6H5- CH = CH2

Thermocol
articles

Polyvinyl

Vinyl chloride
Cl - CH = CH2

P.V.C. pipes,
door mats, tubes
and bags in
hospital kits.
Winter clothing,
blankets

chloride

Structural formula of the
polymer

Carry bags,
sports wear

(PVC)
Polyacrylo nitrile Acrylo nitrile
CH2 = CH - C

Teflon

Uses

N

Nonstick
cookware

Tetrafluro ethylene
CF2= CF2
n

Polypropylene

Injection syringe,
Furniture

Propylene
CH3 - CH = CH2
9.27 Various polymers and their uses

The polymers in the above examples are formed by repetition of single monomer.
These are called homopolymers. The other type of polymers are formed from two or more
monomers. They are called copolymers. For example, PET is poly ethylene terephthalate.
The structures of polymers are linear as in the above examples or they are branched and
cross linked as well. Polymers acquire various properties as per the nature of the monomers
and the type of structure.
The composition and structure of natural polymers were understood after carrying
out their decomposition. The composition of the main natural polymer is given in the
Table 9.28.

132

Polymer

Name of the
monomer
Polysaccharide Glucose

Occurrence

Cellulose

Glucose

Proteins

a amino acids

D.N.A.

Nucleotide
(deoxyribosephosphate)
Nucleotide
(ribosephosphate )
Isoprene
CH2= C-CH=CH2

R.N.A.

Rubber

Use your brain power !

Starch
Wood
(cell walls of plant
cells)
Muscles, hair,
enzymes, skin, egg
Chromosomes of
organisms

1. Structural formulae of some
monomers are given below.
Write the structural formula
of the homopolymer formed
from them.

Nucleus and
cytoplasm of cell

a.

CH3
CH2= C
CH 3

b.

CH3
CH2= C

Latex of rubber
tree

CN

CH 3
9.28 Some natural polymers and their occurrence

2. From the given structural formula of polyvinyl acetate, that
is used in paints and glues, deduce the name and structural
formula of the corresponding monomer.

Exercise
1. Match the pairs.

2.

Group ‘A’

Group ‘B’

a. C2H6
		

1. Unsaturated 		
hydrocarbon

b. C2H2
		

2. Molecular formula
of an alcohol

c. CH4O		
		

3. Saturated 			
hydrocarbon

d. C3H6		

4. Triple bond

Draw an electron dot structure of
the following molecules. (Without
showing the circles)
a. Methane

b. Ethene

c. Methanol

d. Water

3. Draw all possible structural formulae
of compounds from their molecular
formula given below.
a. C3H8

b. C4H10

c . C3H4

4. Explain the following terms with		
example.
a. Structural isomerism
b. Covalent bond
c. Hetero atom in a carbon
compound
d. Functional group
e. Alkane
f. Unsaturated hydrocarbon
g. Homopolymer
h. Monomer
i. Reduction
j. Oxidant

133

5. Write the IUPAC names of the following structural formulae.
a. CH3-CH2-CH2-CH3		
b. CH3-CHOH-CH3
c. CH3-CH2-COOH		
d. CH3-CH2-NH2
e. CH3-CHO			
f. CH3-CO-CH2-CH3
6.		Identify the type of the following reaction of carbon compounds.
a. CH3-CH2-CH2-OH
CH3-CH2-COOH
b. CH3-CH2-CH3
3 CO2 + 4 H2O
c. CH3-CH= CH -CH3 + Br2
CH3-CHBr - CHBr -CH3
d. CH3-CH3 + Cl2
CH3-CH2-Cl + HCl
e. CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-OH
CH3-CH2-CH=CH2+ H2O
f. CH3-CH2-COOH + NaOH
CH3-CH2-COO-Na+ + H2O
g. CH3-COOH + CH3-OH
CH3-COO- CH3+ H2O
7. Write structural formulae for the following IUPAC names.
a. pentan -2-one 		
b. 2- chlorobutane
c. propan - 2- ol 		
d. methanal
e. butanoic acid		
f. 1- bromopropane
g. ethanamine 			
h. butanone
8. Write answers as directed.
a. What causes the existance of very large number of carbon compound ?
b. Saturated hydrocarbons are classified into three types. Write these names giving
one example each.
c. Give any four functional groups containing oxygen as the heteroatom in it. Write
name and structural formula of one example each.
d. Give names of three functional groups containing three different hetero atoms.
Write name and structural formula of one example each.
e. Give names of three natural polymers. Write the place of their occurrance and
names of monomers from which they are formed.
f. What is meant by vinegar and gasohol? What are their uses ?
g. What is a catalyst ? Write any one reaction which is brought about by use of
catalyst ?
Project
Project Prepare a chart giving detailed information of carbon compounds in everyday use.
Display it in the class and discuss.

²²²

134

10. Space Missions
Ø Space Missions 		
ØArtificial satellites
Ø Classification of artificial satellites Ø Orbits of artificial satellites
Ø Space missions away from the Earth
Ø Satellite launch vehicles
1. What is the difference between space and sky?
2. What are different objects in the Solar system?
3. What is meant by a satellite?
4. How many natural satellites does the earth have?

Can you recall

		 Man has always been curious about unknown places and he has always been eager
to expand the horizons of his knowledge by exploring the unknown world. He must have
had deep curiosity about the space and the many twinkling stars in the dark sky. He must
have had dreams to fly to the space and must have been working for that.
Space missions
Substantial developments in technology, specially space technology, in the later half
of twentieth century resulted in the development of space crafts making space voyage
possible. Since then, more than a thousand artificial satellites have been placed into orbits
around the earth. Additionally, space missions have been undertaken for close observation
of various objects in our solar system. We will learn about all this in this chapter.
We can classify the space missions into two categories. In one type of missions, the
objective is to put artificial satellites in orbits around the earth for research and various
other useful applications. The objective of second type of missions is to send the spacecrafts
to outer space for close observations and understanding of the objects in solar system, or
even outside the solar system.

Do you know ?
The first person to go into the space in a spacecraft was Yuri
Gagarin of the then USSR. He orbited the earth in 1961. The first
person to step on the Moon (1969) was Neil Armstrong of USA.
Rakesh Sharma of India orbited the earth in 1984 in a Russian
spacecraft. Kalpana Chawla and Sunita Williams of Indian origin
also participated in space explorations through missions organized
by NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) of USA.

Can you recall?

Which types of telescopes are orbiting around the earth?
Why it is necessary to put them in space?
Where does the signal in your cell phone come from?

Can you tell? Where from does it come to mobile towers? Where does the signal

to your TV set come from? You may have seen photographs
showing the position of monsoon clouds over the country, in the
newspaper. How are these images obtained?

135

Need and importance of space
missions:

10.1 Communication by artificial satellite

The world has become a global
village due to space missions.
Today, we can contact a person in
any part of the world within a
second. We can gather information
about worldwide events sitting at
home. You all know the importance
of internet. Due to internet, every
information is available at our
fingertips. It has become possible to
get advance alert about natural
calamities and
take
proper
precautions.

During war, it is possible to get information about the actions of the enemy through
aerial surveillance using satellites. It is also possible to explore the fossil reserves and
minerals in the earth. Thus, there are unlimited applications of space missions. Today,
space technology is an inevitable part for development of a nation.
Artificial satellite
A natural satellite is an astronomical object orbiting the earth or any other planet.
The moon is the only natural satellite of the earth. Some other planets in the solar system
have more than one natural satellites. Similarly if a manmade object revolves around the
earth or any other planet in a fixed orbit it is called an artificial satellite (fig 10.1).
The first artificial satellite ‘Sputnik’ was sent to
space by Soviet Union in 1957(see figure 10.2). Today,
more than thousand satellites are orbiting the earth. The
satellites work on solar energy. So, solar photovoltaic
panels are attached on both sides of these satellites like
wings. Instruments are installed in the satellites to
receive and transmit signals from and to the earth.
10.2 Sputnik

The satellites have various other types of instruments, depending on their functions.
One such satellite is shown in figure 10.1. Signals transmitted from the earth to the satellite
and from the satellite to a mobile tower and mobile phone are also shown. These satellites
are sent into the space to perform various functions. Depending on their functions, satellites
are classified into following categories:
Use of ICT
Prepare a power point
presentation showing India’s
contribution in space research
and present it in the class.

INSAT: Indian National Satellite
GSAT: Geosynchronous Satellite
IRNSS: Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System‍
IRS : Indian Remote Sensing Satellite
GSLV: Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle
PSLV: Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle

136

Type of satellite
Weather satellite

Function of the satellite
Study and prediction of weather.

Establish communication between
Communication satellite different location in the world
through use of specific waves.
Broadcast satellite
Navigational satellite

Military Satellite

Earth Observation
Satellite

The names of Indian
satellite series and
their launch vehicles
INSAT and GSAT.
Launcher: GSLV.
INSATand GSAT.
Launcher: GSLV.

INSAT and GSAT.
Launcher: GSLV.
Fix the location of any place on the IRNSS.
earth’s surface in terms of its very Launcher : PSLV.
precise latitude and longitude.
Collect information for security
aspects.
Study of forests, deserts, oceans,
polar ice on the earth’s surface,
exploration and management of
IRS.
natural resources, observation and Launcher : PSLV.
guidance in case of natural
calamities like flood and
earthquake.
Telecasting of television programs.

Types of satellites

Internet is my friend

Watch and share 1.https://youtu.be/cuqYLHaLB5M
with others
2. https://youtu.be/y37iHU0jK4s

Orbits of Artificial Satellites
All artificial satellites do not revolve in similar orbits around the earth. The functions
of the satellite decide the height of the satellite’s orbit from the earth’s surface, the nature
of the orbit (circular/elliptical) and whether the orbit shall be parallel to equator or making
some angle with it. To put the satellite in its proper orbit at specific height above the
earth’s surface, the satellite is taken to that height using a satellite launcher. Then the
satellite is given a specific velocity known as the critical velocity (vc) in a tangential
direction to the orbit (fig 10.3). The satellite
then starts revolving around the earth. The
Satellite
Vc
formula for the velocity vc can be derived as
Satellite’s
below.
h
orbit
If a satellite of mass ‘m’ is revolving
around the earth in an orbit of height ‘h’ with
R
speed ‘vc’, then as seen in the chapter on
r
‘Gravitation’, a centripetal force mvc2 will
Earth
r
act on it.
Here, ‘r’ is the orbital radius of the satellite
from the centre of the earth.

.

10.3 Orbit of an artificial satellite

137

This centripetal force is provided by the gravity of the earth.
Therefore, centripetal force=gravitational force between the Earth and the satellite.
mvc2
R+h
vc2 =
vc =

GMm
(R+h)2

=

G = Gravitational constant = 6.67 × 10-11 N m2/kg2
M = Mass of the earth = 6 × 1024 kg
R = Radius of the earth = 6.4 × 106 m = 6400 km
h = Height of the satellite above earth surface
R + h = Radius of the orbit of satellite.

GM
R+h
GM
R+h

.......... (1)

It can be seen that the critical velocity does not depend on the mass of the satellite. As
the height of the satellite’s orbit from the earth’s surface increases, the critical velocity
decreases. Depending on the height of the satellite’s orbit above the earth’s surface, the
satellite orbits are classified as below:
High Earth Orbits : (Height from the earth’s surface > 35780 km)
		 If the height of the satellite’s orbit above the earth’s surface is greater than or equal
to 35780 km, the orbit is called High earth Orbit. As we will see in the next solved example,
a satellite revolving in an orbit 35780 km above the earth’s surface, will take around 24
hours to complete one revolution. We know, that the earth also takes almost 24 hrs for one
revolution. If the satellite is revolving in an orbit parallel to the equator, the time of revolution
for the earth around itself and that for the satellite to revolve around the earth being the
same, the satellite will appear to be stationary with respect to the earth. For a passenger in
one vehicle, another vehicle, moving parallel to him with equal velocity, appears to be
stationary. This is what happens here also. These satellites are, therefore, called
geosynchronous satellites. Since, these satellites are stationary with reference to the earth,
they can observe a specific portion of the earth, continuously. Therefore, they are used in
applications like meteorology and for carrying signals for telephone, television, radio etc.
Medium Earth Orbit (height above the earth’s surface 2000 km to 35780 km)
If the height of the satellite orbit above the earth’s surface is in between 2000 km and
35780 km, the orbits are called medium earth orbits. The geostationary satellites orbit
above the equator. These are, therefore, not useful in the study of polar regions. For this
purpose, elliptical medium earth orbits passing over the polar region are used. These orbits
are called polar orbits. In these orbits, the satellites complete one revolution in 2 to 24
hours.
Some of these satellites revolve in circular orbits at a height of around 20,200 km
above the earth’s surface. Global positioning satellites revolve in such orbits.
Low Earth Orbits (height above the earth’s surface: 180 km to 2000 km)
If the height of the satellite orbit above the earth’s surface is in between 180 km and
2000 km, the orbits are called Low earth Orbits. The satellites used for scientific
experiments and atmospheric studies revolve in low earth orbits. Depending on the height
of their orbits, they complete one revolution in around 90 minutes. International Space
Station and Hubble telescope also revolve in Low earth Orbits.
Figure 10.4 shows various orbits of satellites.

138

MEO

Do you know ?
A group of students from COEP
(College of Engineering, Pune) made a
small satellite and sent it to the space
through ISRO in 2016. The name of the
satellite is ‘Swayam’ and it weighs around
1 kg. It is orbiting the earth at a height of
515 km. The main objective of the satellite
was to provide point to point messaging
services using a special method.

LEO
MEO

HEO
10.4 Orbits of satellites

Solved Example
Example 1. Suppose the orbit of a satellite
is exactly 35780 km above the earth’s
surface. Determine the tangential velocity
of the satellite.
Given : G = 6.67 × 10-11 N m2/kg2 ,
M = 6×1024 kg (for earth)
R = 6400 km (for earth) = 6.4 × 106 m ,
h = height of the satellite above the earth’s
surface 35780 km.
v=?
R + h = 6400 + 35780 = 42180 × 103 m
v=

=

=

=
=

=

GM
R+h
(6.67 x 10-11 ) x ( 6 x 1024)
42180 × 103 m
40.02 x 1013
42180 x 103
40.02
42180

Example 2. In the previous example, how
much time the satellite will take to complete
one revolution around the earth?
Given: Height of the satellite above the
earth’s surface= 35780 km.
Velocity of the satellite=3.08 km/sec
Solution: Suppose, the satellite takes T
seconds to complete one revolution around
the earth. The distance travelled during this
one revolution is equal to the circumference
of the circular orbit. If r is the radius of the
orbit, the satellite will travel a distance 2πr
during one revolution. Thus, the time
required for one complete revolution can
be obtained as follows:
2πr
distance circumference
= T
v = time =
time
T =
=

× 1010

= 86003.38 sec
= 23.89 hrs. = 23 hrs 54 M.

0.0009487909 × 1010
9487909

2 π r = 2 π (R+h)
v
v
2 × 3.14 × (6400 + 35780)
3.08

(Here, since the velocity is taken in the unit of
km/s, the radius is also taken in unit of km)

v = 3080.245 m/s = 3.08 km/s

139

Satellite Launch Vehicles
Satellite launch vehicles are used, to place the satellites in their specific orbits. The
functioning of the satellite launch vehicle is based on the Newton’s third law of motion. The
launch vehicle uses specific type of fuel. The gas produced due to combustion of the fuel
expands due to its high temperature and is expelled forcefully through the nozzles at rear side
of the launch vehicle. As a reaction of this, a thrust acts on the vehicle, which drives the
vehicle high in to the space.
The structure of the launch vehicle is decided by the weight of the satellite and the type
of satellite orbit. The fuel of the vehicle also depends on these factors. The fuel forms a major
portion of the total weight of the launch vehicle. Thus, the vehicle has to carry a large weight
of the fuel with it. To overcome this problem, launch vehicles with more than one stage are
used. Due to this, the weight of the vehicle can be reduced step by step, after its launching. For
example, consider a launch vehicle having two stages. For launching the vehicle, the fuel and
engine in the first stage are used. This imparts a specific
velocity to the vehicle and takes it to a certain height.
Once the fuel in this first stage is exhausted, the empty
fuel tank and the engine are detached from the main
Place for
body of the vehicle and fall either into a sea or on an
satellite
unpopulated land. As the fuel in the first stage is
exhausted, the fuel in the second stage is ignited.
However, the vehicle now contains only one (i.e. the
Forth stage using second) stage. The weight now being reduced, the vehicle
liquid fuel
can move with higher speed. Almost all vehicles are
made of either two or more stages. As an example, the
Third stage
structure of a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV)
using solid fuel
developed by ISRO of India is shown in fig 10.5a.
Second stage
using liquid
fuel

Separation of
fuel tank

First stage
using solid fuel

Engine using
solid fuel
which provides
the initial thrust

Separation of
booster
rockets
Space shuttle

10.5 a. Structure of PSLV
made by ISRO

Satellite is launched in
its orbit and space
shuttle returns to earth

10.5 b. Space shuttle

The launch vehicles are costly, because they can be used only once. USA has, therefore, developed space shuttle (fig 10.5b) which returns to the earth except for the fuel tank
and can be reused in multiple launches.

140

Always Remember
The ‘rocket’, a type of fire-cracker used in Diwali, is also a sort of launcher. In this
rocket, the fuel is ignited using a fuse and the rocket is projected into the sky just like a
satellite launcher. Similarly, if a balloon is blown and released with its end open, the
air in the balloon is forcefully ejected and the balloon is pushed in opposite direction.
This can be explained using the Newton’s third law of motion.
Space missions away from earth
As we have seen above, artificial satellites are being used for making our life more
and more enriched. However, in the previous standard, we have learnt about how the telescopes aboard artificial satellites are used to gather information about various objects in
the universe. Similarly some space missions are used to gain further knowledge about the
universe. In these missions, spacecrafts are sent to the nearby objects in the solar system
to observe them more closely. New information has been obtained from such missions and
it is helping us to understand the creation and evolution of our solar system.
For such missions, the spacecrafts must escape the earth’s gravitational force to travel
into the outer space. To achieve this, the initial velocity of the moving object must be
greater than the escape velocity of the earth as we have learnt in the Chapter on Gravity.
Escape velocity on a planet can be obtained using following formula:
vesc =

vesc =

G = Gravitational constant = 6.67 ´ 10-11 N m2/kg2
M = mass of the planet = 6´ 1024 kg (for earth)
R = Radius of the planet = 6.4 ´ 106 m (for earth)

2 GM

R

2 x 6.67 x 10-11 x 6 x 1024
6.4 x 10

6

= 11.18 x 103 m/s = 11.18 km/s

Thus, if a spacecraft is to escape the earth’s gravitational force to travel to the outer
space, it must have minimum velocity of 11.2 km/s.

Do you know ?
The astronomical object closest to us is the
moon. Light takes 1s to reach from moon to the
earth. It means that if we travel with the speed of
light, it will take 1s to reach the moon. However,
since a spacecraft travels at much smaller speed, it
takes longer time to reach the moon. The shortest
time taken by a spacecraft to reach the moon, so
far, is 8 hours and 36 minutes.

141

Moon missions
Since the moon is the closest astronomical object to us, the first space missions to objects
in the solar system were the missions to the moon. Such missions have so far been executed by
USA, Soviet Union, European countries, China, Japan and India. The space crafts in the Luna
series sent by Soviet Union reached near the moon. Luna 2, launched in 1959 was first such
craft. After that, till 1975, 15 space crafts made chemical analysis of the moon and also
measured its gravity, density and radiations. Last four crafts even landed on the moon and
brought the samples of stones on the moon for analysis in the laboratories. All these missions
were unmanned.
America also executed moon missions from 1962 to 1972. The specialty of these missions
was that some of these were manned missions. In July, 1969, Neil Armstrong became the first
human to step on the moon. In 2008, Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) successfully
launched Chandrayaan- 1 and placed it an into an orbit around the moon. It sent useful
information to earth for about a year. The most important discovery made during the mission
was the presence of water on the moon surface. India was the first country to discover this.
Mars missions
Next to the moon, the astronomical object nearest to the earth is the Mars. Many nations
sent space crafts to the Mars. Mars mission is difficult and almost half the missions were
unsuccessful. However, ISRO’s performance in this mission is remarkable and we all must be
proud of it. The spacecraft ‘Mangalyaan’ made by ISRO using minimum expenses was launched
in November, 2013 and was placed into orbit around the Mars in September, 2014. It obtained
very useful information about the surface of the Mars and the atmosphere around it.

Rakesh Sharma
Kalpana Chawla
Kalpana
Chawla obtained
Rakesh Sharma was
the first Indian to travel to her Engineering in Aeronautics
space. He went into space degree from Punjab and in 1988
along with two Russian obtained her doctorate from
astronauts under the joint University of Colorado. She was
Indo - USSR space in space for 336 hrs during research
mission. While returning to earth
programme. He stayed in
from space, on 1st February, 2003,
space for 8 days.
the Columbia space craft exploded
and Kalpana perished.

Sunita Williams
Sunita
Williams
travelled to the international
space station in space
shuttle Discovery in 2006.
She worked for 29 hrs
outside the space station.
She created a record by
staying for 192 days in
space.

Missions to other planets
Many missions have been executed to study other planets also. In some of these missions
the space crafts orbited the planets, some landed on the planets and some just passed near
the planet and observed them. Additionally, spacecrafts have been sent to observe asteroids
and comets and they have successfully collected some dust and stones from the asteroids
and brought them back on the earth. We are getting very useful information from all these
missions clarifying our concepts about the origin and evolution of the solar system.

142

India and space technology
India also has made remarkable progress in the science and technology of launch
vehicles. Various types of launch vehicles have been developed to put satellites having
weight up to 2500 kg, into all types of orbits. PSLV and GSLV are two important launchers.
The scientific and technological feats achieved by India in this field have a significant
contribution to the national and social development. INSAT and GSAT satellite series is
actively working in the field of telecommunication, television broadcasting and
meteorological services. Availability of television, telephone and internet services all over
the nation has been possible due to these satellites only. EDUSAT satellite in this series is
used specially in the field of education. IRS satellite series is working for monitoring and
management of natural resources and disaster management. To exactly locate position of
any place on the earth’s surface in terms of its precise latitude and longitude, the IRNSS
satellite series has been established.
Read about:

Satellite Launch Centers: Space Research Organizations:
1. Thumba,
1.Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, 		
Thiruvanathapuram
Thiruvanathapuram
2. Satish Dhavan Space Research Center,
2. Sriharikota
Sriharikota
3. Chandipur, Odisha
3. Space Application Center, Ahmedabad

Introduction to scientists
Vikram Sarabhai is considered as the father of Indian space
program. His efforts led to foundation of Physical Research Laboratory
(PRL) at Ahmedabad. In 1962, Indian government constituted ‘Indian
National Committee for Space Research’ under his Chairmanship
and first satellite launch center was established at Thumba in 1963.
The launching of India’s first satellite ‘Aryabhatta’ into the space,
was the result of his efforts. He played an important role in the
establishment of Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO).
Space Debris and its management
In addition to the artificial satellite, some other objects are also revolving around the
earth. It includes, non-functional satellites, parts of the launcher detached during launching
and debris generated due to collision of satellite with other satellite or any other object in the
space. According to one estimation made in 2016, there are about 2 crore pieces of length
more than 1 cm, revolving around the earth! All this is nothing but the debris in space.
This debris can be harmful to the artificial satellites. It can collide with these satellites
or space crafts and damage them. This debris is increasing day by day. Soon, it will be
difficult to launch new spacecrafts. It is, therefore, very essential to manage the debris.
Some studies and experiments are being done with this in view. Hope that soon we will
have a solution for this problem and the future satellites and spacecrafts will not be in
danger any more.

Books are my friends: For more information read the reference books in your library.
1. Space and science - Dr. J V Narlikar.
2. Story of ISRO - Dr. V. R. Gowarikar.

143

Exercise
1.

4.

Fill in the blanks and explain the 		
statements with reasoning:

Complete the following table.
IRNSS

a. If the height of the orbit of a satellite
from the earth surface is increased,
the tangential velocity of the satellite
will …
b. The
initial
velocity
(during
launching) of the Managalyaan,
must be greater than …………..of
the earth.
2. State with reasons whether the
following sentences are true or false

Weather study
& predict

Earth’s
observation

5.

a. If a spacecraft has to be sent away
from the influence of earth’s
gravitational field, its velocity must
be less than the escape velocity.
b. The escape velocity on the moon is
less than that on the earth.
d. A satellite needs a specific velocity
to revolve in a specific orbit.
e.

If the height of the orbit of a satellite
increases, its velocity must also
increase.
3. Answer the following questions:
a. What is meant by an artificial
satellite? How are the satellites
classified based on their functions?
b.

What is meant by the orbit of a
satellite? On what basis and how are
the orbits of artificial satellites
classified?

c.

Why are geostationary satellites not
useful for studies of polar regions?

d.

What is meant by satellite launch
vehicles? Explain a satellite launch
vehicle developed by ISRO with the
help of a schematic diagram.

e.

Why it is beneficial to use satellite
launch vehicles made of more than
one stage?

144

Solve the following problems.
a. If mass of a planet is eight times the
mass of the earth and its radius is
twice the radius of the earth, what
will be the escape velocity for that
planet?
			
Ans : 22.4 km/s
b. How much time a satellite in an orbit
at height 35780 km above earth’s surface would take, if the mass of the
earth would have been four times its
original mass?
				 Ans : ~ 12 hrs
c. If the height of a satellite completing
one revolution around the earth in T
seconds is h1 meter, then what would
be the height of a satellite taking
2 2 T seconds for one revolution?
				 Ans : R + 2h1

Project :

1. Collect information about the space
missions undertaken by Sunita
Williams.
2. Assume that you are interviewing
Sunita Williams. Prepare a
questionnaire and also the answers.

²²²

